The winter heliotrope is dead, its leaves and stems blighted.
Shards and stones are prized as jewels, Sui and He rejected [捐棄隨和].
The leaden knife is praised for sharpness, Tai E discarded as blunt.
The thoroughbred droops his ears; for a long time now no one has used him.
A lame ass draws the chariot and stumbles half-way up the hill.
The pure are in hiding; the favoured are fools.
The phoenix may not soar; but quails vaunt their flight. (tr. Hawkes 1985: 277) </poem>
Four other "Chuci" poems mention Bian He's jade-disk. For example, "Disgust with the World" includes him in a list of rulers who rejected loyal people, "And I grieve, too, for Bian He, the man of Chu [悲楚人之和氏兮]: / The jade he presented was judged worthless stone. / Both King Li and King Wu refused to examine it, / And he ended with both his feet cut off for his pains." (tr. Hawkes 1985: 251).

King Liu An's c. 139 BCE "Huainanzi" ([Writings of the] Masters of Huainan) philosophical compendium has four contexts referring to the Marquis of Sui's pearl, three of which also refer to Mr. He's jade-disk using the names Heshi (和氏, "Mr. He") or Heshi (咼氏, "Mr. He", using an uncommon variant character), and Bianshi (卞氏, "Mr. Bian").

"A Mountain of Persuasions" chapter mentions marquis Sui's legendary pearl twice with Mr. He's jade-disk. The former explains the essence of Chinese jade.
When a piece of jade is moistened, it looks bright. [When struck], its sound is slow and harmonious. How expansive are its aspects! With no interior or exterior, it does not conceal its flaws or imperfections. Close up, it looks glossy; from a distance, it shines brightly. It reflects like a mirror revealing the pupil of your eye. Subtly it picks up the tip of an autumn hair. It brightly illuminates the dark and obscure. Thus the jade disk of Mr. He [和氏之璧] and the pearl of the marquis of Sui [隨侯之珠] emerged from the essence of a mountain and a spring. When the Superior Man wears them, he complies with their purity and secures his repose. When lords and kings treasure them, they rectify the world. (16, tr. Major et al. 2010: 631) 
The latter says understanding is more important than wealth, "Acquiring an army of ten thousand men does not compare to hearing one word that is apposite; / Acquiring the pearl of the marquis of Sui [隨侯之珠] does not compare to understanding from whence events arise. / Acquiring the jade disk of Mr. Gua [咼氏之璧] does not compare to understanding where events will lead." (16, tr. Major et al. 2010: 652).

Two other chapters figuratively use the legendary gems. One as a simile for someone who has attained the "Tiandao" (天道, Way of Heaven), "It is like the pearl of Marquis Sui [隨侯之珠] / or the jade disk of Mr. He [和氏之璧] / Those who achieved it became rich / those who lost it became poor." (6, tr. Major et al. 2010: 218). The other advises, "With a rhinoceros and a tiger behind you and the pearl of the marquis of Sui [隨侯之珠] in front of you, do not try to grab [the pearl]. First avoid the calamity, and then go for the profit." (17, tr. Major et al. 2010: 706)

The Han dynasty historiographer Sima Qian's c. 94 BCE "Shiji" (Records of the Grand Historian) records the Marquis of Sui in the House of Chu genealogy, an episode which is not mentioned in the "Zuo zhuan" above. "In the fifty-first year (690 B.C.), Chou summoned the Marquis of Sui, reproving him for causing Ch'u to be established as a kingdom. The King of Ch'u was angry and, thinking that Sui has turned its back on him, launched a punitive expedition against Sui. King Wu expired in the midst of his army and the troops were dismissed." (40, tr. Neinhauser 2006: 388).

The biography of Qin dynasty Grand chancellor Li Si (c. 280-208 BCE) collectively mentions "Sui He zhi bao" (隨和之寶, "treasures of [Marquis] Sui and [Mr.] He") in a letter advising Emperor Qin Shi Huang not to follow Zheng Guo's advice to expel foreigners from Qin.
Now Your Majesty imports jade from the Kun Mountains and possesses the treasures of Sui and He. Dangling moon-bright pearls [明月之珠], you buckle on the sword Taia, are drawn by fine steeds like Xianli, set up phoenix banners blazoned with kingfisher feathers, and employ drums of sacred lizard skin. Not one of these various precious things is a product native to Qin, and yet Your Majesty takes joy in them. Why? If something must be a product of Qin before it can be acceptable, then no night-shining jewels [夜光之璧] would adorn the court chambers, no vessels of rhinoceros horn or elephant tusk would amuse and delight you, no women of Zheng and Wey would throng the harem, and no fine horses and spirited thoroughbreds would fill your stables. The gold and tin from south of the Yangtze could not be utilized, the vermilion and blue of Shu could not be used for pigment. (87, tr. Watson 1961 3: 182) 

The "Shiji" biography of the Han political advisor Zou Yang (鄒陽; c. 206-129 BCE) refers to the "Suihouzhizhu" and "Yeguangzhibi" (夜光之璧, "night-glowing jade ring") as valuable gems that could be overlooked unless they were examined.
A twisted tree with gnarled roots, bent and bulging with not one straight twig may become the vessel of a ten-thousand chariot state. Why is this? Because it was first polished by [the ruler's] attendants. Thus when something arrives without notice, even though one might be giving away the Marquis of Sui's pearl [隨侯之珠] or a glowing jade ring [夜光之璧], one will acquire resentment and be accorded no gratitude. When men speak of one beforehand, one can establish such a merit with a wilted tree and a shrived stump that none will forget it. (83, tr. Neinhauser 2008: 291). 

The "Shuo Yuan" (Garden of Stories), which the historian and bibliographer Liu Xiang (77–6 BCE) compiled from early sources, quotes Mozi (cf. above) using Marquis of Sui's pearl in a conversation against ostentation with his disciple Qin Guxi (禽滑釐), called Qinzi (Master Qin), who asked about using embroidered silks and fine linens. Mozi said, "Suppose that in a year of bad times, someone wished to give you the pearl of the Marquis of Sui [隨侯之珠], yet would not allow you to sell it, but only to keep it as a valuable decoration. Or that he wished to give you a "chung" ["zhōng" (鍾, "cup")] of grain. If you would get the pearl you would not get the grain, and vice versa. Then which would you choose?" Qinzi answered that he would choose the grain that could rescue him from extremity. Mozi replied, "Truly so. So then why strive after lavishness? The Sage does not hasten to exalt what is without use and to delight in frivolity and licence." (tr. Fung 1952: 104).

The skeptical philosopher Wang Chong's c. 80 CE "Lunheng" (Balanced Discourses) has a passage contrasting genuine gemstones found in nature with artificial ones made by Daoist "waidan" alchemists, and it uses the ambiguous phrase "suihou yi yao zuo zhu" (隨侯以藥作珠), which can be literally translated "the Marquis of Sui made pearls from chemicals" (Forke 1907: 378), or contextually translated "by following proper timing (i.e. when to begin heating and how long to go on) pearls can be made from chemicals" (Needham and Wang 1962: 112). Chinese scholars traditionally interpreted this "suihou" as "Marquis of Sui", who was famous for the grateful snake's luminous pearl, yet the "Lunheng" is the only early text that claims that he made imitation pearls. Some modern sinologists familiar with early Chinese alchemy and glass production, such as Joseph Needham and Wang Ling, interpret "suihou" as an "old alchemical pun" meaning "following the [fire-]times", reading "sui" in its basic meaning "follow; comply with" and "hóu" (侯, "marquis") as a phonetic loan character for "hòu" (候, "time; wait; situation"), denoting the term "huǒhou" (火候, "fire-times; times when heating should begin and end"), which were "both ancient and important in Chinese alchemy." The "Cantong qi" uses "Yijing" hexagrams to express alchemical "fire-times" (Needham and Wang 1956: 330).

This "Lunheng" context contrasts two genuine/artificial pairs: first jades and pearls as gemstones, then "yangsui" ("burning lenses") and brightly polished swords as fire starters. Compare the following English translations.
The laws of Heaven can be applied in a right and in a wrong way. The right way is in harmony with Heaven, the wrong one owes its results to human astuteness, but cannot in its effects be distinguished from the right one. This will be shown by the following. Among the "Tribute of Yü" are mentioned jade and white corals. These were the produce of earth and genuine precious stones and pearls. But the Taoists melt five kinds of stones, and make five-coloured gems out of them. Their lustre, if compared with real gems, does not differ. Pearls in fishes and shells are as genuine as the jade-stones in the "Tribute of Yu". Yet the Marquis of Sui made pearls from chemicals [隨侯以藥作珠], which were as brilliant as genuine ones. This is the climax of Taoist learning and a triumph of their skill. By means of a burning-glass one catches fire from heaven. Of five stones liquefied on the "Ping-wu" day of the 5th moon an instrument is cast, which, when polished bright, held up against the sun, brings down fire too, in precisely the same manner as, when fire is caught in the proper way. Now, one goes even so far as to furbish the crooked blades of swords, till they shine, when, held up against the sun, they attract fire also. Crooked blades are not burning-glasses; that they can catch fire is the effect of rubbing. Now, provided the bad-natured men are of the same kind as good-natured ones, then they can be influenced, and induced to do good. Should they be of a different kind, they can also be coerced in the same manner as the Taoists cast gems, Sui Hou made pearls [隨侯之所作珠], and people furbish the crooked blades of swords. Enlightened with learning and familiarized with virtue, they too begin by and by to practise benevolence and equity. (8, tr. Forke 1907: 378-379). 
In the Tao of Heaven there are genuine ["zhen" 真] things and counterfeit ["wei" 偽] things; the true things are firm in their correspondence with Heaven's naturalness; the artificial things are due to human knowledge and art—and the latter are often indistinguishable from the former. The "Tribute of Yu" (chapter of the "Shu Ching") speaks of bluish jade ["qiulin" 璆琳] and ["langgan" 琅玕] (possibly agate, ruby, or coral). These were the products of the earth, and genuine like jade and pearls. But now the Taoists melt and fuse ["xiaoshuo" 消爍] five kinds of minerals and make 'jade' of five colours out of them. The lustre of these is not at all different from that of true jade. Similarly, pearls from fishy oysters are like the bluish jade of the "Tribute of Yu"; all true and genuine (natural products). But by following proper timing (i.e. when to begin heating and how long to go on) pearls can be made from chemicals ["yao" 藥], just as brilliant as genuine ones. This is the climax of Taoist learning and a triumph of their skill. Now by means of the burning-mirror ["yangsui"] one catches fire from heaven. Yet of five mineral substances liquefied and transmuted on a ["bingwu"] day in the fifth month, an instrument ["qi" 器] is cast, which, when brightly polished and held up against the sun, brings down fire too, in precisely the same manner as when fire is caught in the proper way. Indeed, people go so far now as to furbish up the curved blades of swords, so that when held against the sun they attract fire also. Though curved blades are not (strictly speaking) burning mirrors, they can catch fire because of the rubbing to which they have been subjected. (tr. Needham and Wang 1962: 112) 

Although a post-Han text, the imperial historian Gan Bao's c. 350 CE "Soushen Ji" (In Search of the Supernatural) has two interesting stories about grateful animals presenting luminous pearls/gems. The first involves a black crane; according to legend, when a crane has lived a thousand years it turns blue after another thousand it turns black and is called a "xuanhe" (玄鶴, "dark crane").
Kuai Shen [噲參] was the most filial son to his mother. Once a black crane was injured by a bow hunter and in its extremity, went to Kuai. The latter took it in, doctored its wound, and when it was cured set it free. Soon afterwards the crane showed up again outside Kuai's door. The latter shone a torch to see out and discovered its mate there too. Each of them held a single night-glowing pearl [明珠] in its beak to repay Kuai. (tr. DeWoskin and Crump 1996: 238). 
The second story is a detailed version of the Marquis of Sui's pearl.
Once upon a time, when the ruler of the old Sui kingdom was journeying, he came upon a great wounded serpent whose back was broken. The ruler believed the creature to be a spirit manifestation and ordered his physician to treat it with drugs to close up its wound. Thereafter the serpent was able to move again, and the place was called Mound of the Wounded Serpent. One year later the serpent brought a bright pearl [明珠] in its mouth to give the ruler of Sui to show its gratitude. The pearl was greater than an inch in diameter, of the purest white and emitted light like moonglow. In the dark it could illuminate an entire room. For these reasons it was known as "Duke Sui's Pearl" [隨侯珠] or the "Spirit Snake's Pearl" [靈蛇珠], or, again, the "Moonlight Pearl" [明月珠]. (tr. DeWoskin and Crump 1996: 239). 

The French sinologist Berthold Laufer notes the remarkable "Soushen ji" parallels with a 3rd-century Roman legend. The c. 222 CE "De Natura Animalium" (On the Characteristics of Animals), compiled by Claudius Aelianus, told the story of Heraclea or Herakleis, a virtuous widow of Tarentum, who after seeing a fledgling stork fall and break its leg, nursed it back to health, and set it free. One year later, as Heraclea sat at the door of her cottage, the young stork returned and dropped a precious stone into her lap, and she put it indoors. Awakening that night, she saw that the gem "diffused a brightness and a gleam, and the house was lit up as though a torch had been brought in, so strong a radiance came from, and was engendered by, the lump of stone." (tr. Scholfield 1959: 209-210).
Based upon the similarities within these Greek and Chinese versions of the story, even in details such as the grateful animal returning after one year, are so striking, that a "historical connection between the two is obvious." (1915: 60).




