Noogenesis

Noogenesis is the emergence and evolution of intelligence.

Noo-, nous (, ), from the ancient Greek , is a term that currently encompasses the meanings: "mind, intelligence, intellect, reason; wisdom; insight, intuition, thought."

Noogenesis was first mentioned in the posthumously published in 1955 book "The Phenomenon of Man" by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, an anthropologist and philosopher, in a few places:

The lack of any kind of definition of the term has led to a variety of interpretations reflected in the book, including "the contemporary period of evolution on Earth, signified by transformation of biosphere onto the sphere of intelligence—noosphere", "evolution run by human mind" etc.
The most widespread interpretation is thought to be "the emergence of mind, which follows geogenesis, biogenesis and anthropogenesis, forming a new sphere on Earth—noosphere".

In 2005 Alexey Eryomin in the monograph Noogenesis and Theory of Intellect proposed a new concept of noogenesis in understanding the evolution of intellectual systems, concepts of intellectual systems, information logistics, information speed, intellectual energy, intellectual potential, consolidated into a theory of the intellect which combines the biophysical parameters of intellectual energy—the amount of information, its acceleration (frequency, speed) and the distance it's being sent—into a formula.
According to the new concept—proposed hypothesis continue prognostic progressive evolution of the species "Homo sapiens", the analogy between the human brain with the enormous number of neural cells firing at the same time and a similarly functioning human society.
A new understanding of the term "noogenesis" as an evolution of the intellect was proposed by A. Eryomin. A hypothesis based on recapitulation theory links the evolution of the human brain to the development of human civilization. The parallel between the number of people living on Earth and the number of neurons becomes more and more obvious leading us to viewing global intelligence as an analogy for human brain.
All of the people living on this planet have undoubtedly inherited the amazing cultural treasures of the past, be it production, social and intellectual ones. We are genetically hardwired to be a sort of "live RAM" of the global intellectual system. Alexey Eryomin suggests that humanity is moving towards a unified self-contained informational and intellectual system. His research has shown the probability of Super Intellect realizing itself as Global Intelligence on Earth. We could get closer to understanding the most profound patterns and laws of the Universe if these kinds of research were given enough attention. Also, the resemblance between the individual human development and such of the whole human race has to be explored further if we are to face some of the threats of the future.

Therefore, generalizing and summarizing: 
The term "noogenesis" can be used in a variety of fields i.e. medicine, biophysics, semiotics, mathematics, information technology, psychology, theory of global evolution etc. thus making it a truly cross-disciplinary one. In astrobiology noogenesis concerns the origin of intelligent life and more specifically technological civilizations capable of communicating with humans and or traveling to Earth. The lack of evidence for the existence of such extraterrestrial life creates the Fermi paradox.

The emergence of the human mind is considered to be one of the five fundamental phenomenons of emergent evolution. 
To understand the mind, it is necessary to determine how human thinking differs from other thinking beings. Such differences include the ability to generate calculations, to combine dissimilar concepts, to use mental symbols, and to think abstractly.
The knowledge of the phenomenon of intelligent systems—the emergence of reason (noogenesis) boils down to:


Several published works which do not employ the term "noogenesis", however, address some patterns in the emergence and functioning of the human intelligence: working memory capacity ≥ 7, ability to predict, prognosis, hierarchical (6 layers neurons) system of information analysis, consciousness, memory, generated and consumed information properties etc. They also set the limits of several physiological aspects of human intelligence. Сonception of emergence of insight.

Historical evolutionary development and emergence of "H. sapiens" as species, include emergence of such concepts as anthropogenesis, phylogenesis, morphogenesis, cephalization, systemogenesis, cognition systems autonomy.

On the other hand, development of an individual's intellect deals with concepts of embryogenesis, ontogenesis, morphogenesis, neurogenesis, higher nervous function of I.P.Pavlov and his philosophy of mind.
Despite the fact that the morphofunctional maturity is usually reached by the age of 13, the definitive functioning of the brain structures is not complete until about 16–17 years of age.

The fields of Bioinformatics, genetic engineering, noopharmacology, cognitive load, brain stimulations, the efficient use of altered states of consciousness, use of non-human cognition, information technology (IT), artificial intelligence (AI) are all believed to be effective methods of intelligence advancement and may be the future of intelligence on earth and the galaxy.

In his 2019 book “The Syntellect Hypothesis: Five Paradigms of the Mind’s Evolution,” futurist and evolutionary cyberneticist Alex M. Vikoulov uses the term "noogenesis" as “The Origin of Mind”, the emergence and evolution of intelligence. The author refers to computation-based biological evolution as a process of Noogenesis. At the present day, the Noosphere is evolving towards the ‘Syntellect’ (Greek syn, with, together + intellect) which can be defined as the unified mind of civilization that integrates all individual natural and artificial minds through the mediation and accumulative effects of information networks. The Syntellect Hypothesis which is the main focus of his book, as its title suggests, refers to a phase transition of a complex intelligent system to self-awareness of a living, conscious superorganism when intellectual synergy of its components reaches threshold complexity to become one supermind. This metamorphosis is associated with emergence of higher-order self-awareness and dimensionality of a new consciousness structure. As a bio-species merging with its advanced technology, human-machine civilization is now on the verge of the 'Syntellect Emergence' – becoming one Global Mind – Gaia v.2.0.

The development of the human brain, perception, cognition, memory and neuroplasticity are unsolved problems in neuroscience. Several megaprojects are being carried out in: Blue Brain Project, Allen Brain Atlas, Human Connectome Project, Google Brain, - in attempt to better our understanding of the brain's functionality along with the intention to develop human cognitive performance in the future with artificial intelligence, informational, communication and cognitive technology. An International Brain Initiative currently integrated national-level brain research initiatives (American BRAIN Initiative, European Human Brain Project, China Brain Project, Japan Brain/MINDS, Canadian Brain Research Strategy, Australian Brain Alliance, Korea Brain Initiative) with goals support an interface between countries to enable synergistic interactions with interdisciplinary approaches arising from the latest research in neuroscience and brain-inspired artificial intelligence etc. According to the Russian National Strategy - fundamental scientific research should be aimed at creating universal artificial intelligence.


