Transparency (behavior)

Transparency, as used in science, engineering, business, the humanities and in other social contexts, is operating in such a way that it is easy for others to see what actions are performed. Transparency implies openness, communication, and accountability.

Transparency is practiced in companies, organizations, administrations, and communities. For example, a cashier making change after a point of sale transaction by offering a record of the items purchased (e.g., a receipt) as well as counting out the customer's change on the counter demonstrates one type of transparency.

The term "transparency" has a very different meaning in information security where it is used to describe security mechanisms that are intentionally in-detectable or hidden from view. Examples include hiding utilities and tools which the user does not need to know in order to do their job, like keeping the remote re-authentication operations of Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol hidden from the user. 

In Norway and in Sweden, tax authorities annually release the "skatteliste", "taxeringskalendern", or "tax list"; official records showing the annual income and overall wealth of nearly every taxpayer.

Regulations in Hong Kong require banks to list their top earners – without naming them – by pay band.

In 2009, the Spanish government for the first time released information on how much each cabinet member is worth, but data on ordinary citizens is private.

Radical transparency is a management method where nearly all decision making is carried out publicly. All draft documents, all arguments for and against a proposal, all final decisions, and the decision making process itself are made public and remain publicly archived. This approach has grown in popularity with the rise of the Internet. Two examples of organizations utilizing this style are the GNU/Linux community and Indymedia.

Corporate transparency, a form of radical transparency, is the concept of removing all barriers to —and the facilitating of— free and easy public access to corporate information and the laws, rules, social connivance and processes that facilitate and protect those individuals and corporations that freely join, develop, and improve the process.

Accountability and transparency are of high relevance for non-governmental organisations (NGOs). In view of their responsibilities to stakeholders, including donors, sponsors, programme beneficiaries, staff, states and the public, they are considered to be of even greater importance to them than to commercial undertakings. Yet these same values are often found to be lacking in NGOs.

The "International NGO Accountability Charter", linked to the Global Reporting Initiative, documents the commitment of its members international NGOs to accountability and transparency, requiring them to submit an annual report, among others. Signed in 2006 by 11 NGOs active in the area of humanitarian rights, the INGO Accountability Charter has been referred to as the “first global accountability charter for the non-profit sector”. In 1997, the One World Trust created an "NGO Charter", a code of conduct comprising commitment to accountability and transparency.

Media transparency is the concept of determining how and why information is conveyed through various means.

If the media and the public knows everything that happens in all authorities and county administrations there will be a lot of questions, protests and suggestions coming from media and the public. People who are interested in a certain issue will try to influence the decisions. Transparency creates an everyday participation in the political processes by media and the public. One tool used to increase everyday participation in political processes is freedom of information legislation and requests. Modern democracy builds on such participation of the people and media.

There are, for anybody who is interested, many ways to influence the decisions at all levels in society.

The right and the means to examine the process of decision making is known as transparency.
In politics, transparency is used as a means of holding public officials accountable and fighting corruption. When a government's meetings are open to the press and the public, its budgets may be reviewed by anyone, and its laws and decisions are open to discussion, it is seen as transparent. It is not clear however if this provides less opportunity for the authorities to abuse the system for their own interests.

When military authorities classify their plans as secret, transparency is absent. This can be seen as either positive or negative; positive because it can increase national security, negative because it can lead to corruption and, in extreme cases, a military dictatorship.

While a liberal democracy can be a plutocracy, where decisions are made behind locked doors and the people have fewer possibilities to influence politics between the elections, a participative democracy is more closely connected to the will of the people. Participative democracy, built on transparency and everyday participation, has been used officially in northern Europe for decades. In the northern European country Sweden, public access to government documents became a law as early as 1766. It has officially been adopted as an ideal to strive for by the rest of EU, leading to measures like freedom of information laws and laws for lobby transparency.

To promote transparency in politics, Hans Peter Martin, Paul van Buitenen (Europa Transparant) and Ashley Mote decided to cooperate under the name Platform for Transparency (PfT) in 2005. Similar organizations that promotes transparency are Transparency International and the Sunlight Foundation.

A recent political movement to emerge in conjunction with the demands for transparency is the Pirate Party, a label for a number of political parties across different countries who advocate freedom of information, direct democracy, network neutrality, and the free sharing of knowledge.

21st century culture affords a higher level of public transparency than ever before, and actually requires it in many cases. Modern technology and associated culture shifts have changed how government works (see WikiLeaks), what information people can find out about each other, and the ability of politicians to stay in office if they are involved in sex scandals. Due to the digital revolution, people no longer have a high level of control over what is public information, leading to a tension between the values of transparency and privacy.

Scholarly research in any academic discipline may also be labeled as (partly) transparent (or open research) if some or all relevant aspects of the research are open in the sense of open source, open access and open data, thereby facilitating social recognition and accountability of the scholars who did the research and replication by others interested in the matters addressed by it.

Some mathematicians and scientists are critical of using closed source mathematical software such as Mathematica for mathematical proofs, because these do not provide transparency, and thus are not verifiable. Open-source software such as SageMath aims to solve this problem.

In the computer software world, open source software concerns the creation of software, to which access to the underlying source code is freely available. This permits use, study, and modification without restriction.

In computer security, the debate is ongoing as to the relative merits of the full disclosure of security vulnerabilities, versus a security-by-obscurity approach.

There is a different (perhaps almost opposite) sense of transparency in human-computer interaction, whereby a system after change adheres to its previous external interface as much as possible while changing its internal behaviour. That is, a change in a system is transparent to its users if the change is unnoticeable to them.

Sports has become a global business over the last century, and here, too, initiatives ranging from mandatory drug testing to the fighting of sports-related corruption are gaining ground based on the transparent activities in other domains.

Sigmund Freud following Friedrich Nietzsche ("On Truth and Lie in a Nonmoral Sense") regularly argues that transparency is impossible because of the occluding function of the unconscious.

Among philosophical and literary works that have examined the idea of transparency are Michel Foucault's "Discipline and Punish" or David Brin's "The Transparent Society". 
The German philosopher and media theorist Byung-Chul Han in his 2012 work "Transparenzgesellschaft" sees transparency as a cultural norm created by neoliberal market forces, which he understands as the insatiable drive toward voluntary disclosure bordering on the pornographic. According to Han, the dictates of transparency enforce a totalitarian system of openness at the expense of other social values such as shame, secrecy, and trust. He was criticized for his concepts, as they would suggest corrupt politics and for referring to the anti-democratic Carl Schmitt.

Anthropologists have long explored ethnographically the relation between revealed and concealed knowledges, and have increasingly taken up the topic in relation to accountability, transparency and conspiracy theories and practices today. Todd Sanders and Harry West for example suggest not only that realms of the revealed and concealed require each other, but also that transparency in practice produces the very opacities it claims to obviate.

Clare Birchall, Christina Gaarsten, Mikkel Flyverbom, and Mark Fenster among others, write in the vein of 'Critical Transparency Studies' which attempts to challenge particular orthodoxies concerning transparency. 
Birchall, assessed in an article "[...] whether the ascendance of transparency as an ideal limits political thinking, particularly for western socialists and radicals struggling to seize opportunities for change [...]". She argues that the promotion of 'datapreneurial' activity through open data initiatives outsources and interrupts the political contract between governed and government. She is concerned that the dominant model of governmental data-driven transparency produces neoliberal subjectivities that reduce the possibility of politics as an arena of dissent between real alternatives. She suggests that the radical Left might want to work with and reinvent secrecy as an alternative to neoliberal transparency.

Researchers at University of Oxford and Warwick Business School found that transparency can also have significant unintended consequences in the field of medical care. McGivern and Fischer found 'media spectacles' and transparent regulation combined to create 'spectacular transparency' which some perverse effects on doctors' practice and increased defensive behaviour in doctors and their staff. Similarly, in a four-year organizational study, Fischer and Ferlie found that transparency in the context of a clinical risk management can act perversely to undermine ethical behavior, leading to organizational crisis and even collapse.





Knowledge mobilization

The term knowledge mobilization (KMb) refers to moving available knowledge (often from formal research) into active use. More than just "bridging the gap", KMb seeks to make connections between research/expertise and policy/practice in order to improve outcomes in various organizations or sectors. KMb involves knowledge sharing between research producers (e.g. university researchers) and research users (including professionals or others whose work can benefit from research findings), often with the help of third parties or intermediaries. The concept has grown out of increasing recognition that verified empirical knowledge should be the basis for many policies and practices.
Social science research deals with the people side of quality of life issues and nation-building that are so crucial to the future of humanity. Human, technological and cultural developments are needed for economic prosperity, environmental sustainability, social harmony and cultural vitality. Yet using research in the social sciences presents particular challenges because the issues are often complex and long-term, and deeply affected by local contexts.

The term KMb gained wider use following the publication of the evaluation report of the Community-University Research Alliance (CURA) program of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) in 2004. This led SSHRC to create a division of Knowledge Products and Mobilization to enhance and accelerate the movement of research findings into policy and program development. Although many other terms are used to describe this same work, KMb, or knowledge mobilization, is the term most often used by the social science and humanities fields in Canada.

As in many other areas of social science, many different terms and approaches are used to define the knowledge mobilization process in different sectors and disciplines. The health sector often uses the term knowledge translation, whereas the business sector uses knowledge management, and so on. The Research Supporting Practice in Education (RSPE) Team at the University of Toronto – Ontario Institute for Studies in Education has created a synthesized list of the various terms and definitions currently being used.

There is considerable overlap between different terms but the subtle differences can affect our understanding of the topic. For example, the term Knowledge Transfer, implies that knowledge is like an object that can be given from one person to another, whereas terms such as Knowledge Exchange or Knowledge Mobilization imply that knowledge is altered as it passes from person to person. However, regardless of the term, the underlying intent in all cases is to make research matter more in policy and practice for organizational and system improvement.
The term 'knowledge' also carries multiple meanings. Some literature describes two types of knowledge; explicit and tacit. Tacit knowledge is gained through personal experience, and is difficult to codify and transfer; where explicit knowledge is often instrumental and can be more easily transported through various mediums. KMb tends to focus on explicit knowledge derived from formal research, while recognizing that tacit knowledge is also very important in practice.

Even within formal research settings, there is often disagreement about how much and what kinds of evidence provide sufficient warrant to claim that something is 'knowledge'.
A similar debate exists over what can be regarded as 'use' of research, with considerable evidence showing that research has an impact in diffuse ways and sometimes over long periods of time A detailed definition of knowledge mobilization, in relation to other practices such as community engagement, can be found on the website of the Institute for Community Engaged Scholarship.

Knowledge mobilization is a proactive process that involves specific efforts to build relationships between research producers and users, such as formal and informal events, networks, and collaboration on resources for research use. The broad concept of knowledge mobilization encompasses a variety of strategies, including producer push (where researchers do the work of trying to share knowledge), user pull (where research users seek information), knowledge exchange and the co-production of knowledge. These strategies may be informal or formal and can take place in many different places and ways.

The internet has become the prime vehicle through which research knowledge is shared, although direct personal connections among people remain a powerful means of sharing knowledge. In some fields or organizations there are specific roles for knowledge mobilization specialists (whose roles may have various names) to find, evaluate, synthesize and summarize findings to tailor and maximize the use of relevant and appropriate research. The goal is to replace practices based on belief with evidence-based practices in order to produce more effective outcomes. Researchers and research users can both benefit from the interaction required by KMb. Collaboration among various parties can improve the research enterprise as well by facilitating more relevant and effective scholarship as well as increased take-up of research findings.

Knowledge brokers or intermediaries act as bridges between the users and producers of the knowledge. They have to ensure that relevant information is made available in the right format. These ideas of quality research informed by the needs of research users, accurate interpretation, open access and just-in-time service are the bases for good researcher-user interface, often provided by knowledge brokers who can synthesize a large body of research and look for policy and practice implications that facilitate use of research results. Many different individuals and organizations play a brokering or intermediary role, from think tanks to lobby groups to political parties to professional or trade associations, to promoters of particular products or strategies. These various bodies may have very different motivations and degrees of objectivity in their approach. Much brokering occurs as part of political debate, in which the contention among ideas is part of broader political processes.

Research into the role of knowledge brokering in the UK health sector found that key individuals often play a major role in knowledge mobilization. A large study of knowledge mobilization by University of Oxford researchers found effective 'knowledge leadership' is crucial to moving evidence-based research into organizational practice, and creating 'epistemic fit'.

The Canadian Health Services Research Foundation (CHSRF), which has made extensive use of knowledge brokering and promoted evidence-informed decision making in the health services field, has developed extensive tools and resources that are finding use outside the health field. Similarly, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) have developed the idea of knowledge translation as a means to make better use of research in the health field. The RSPE provides many examples of and resources for knowledge brokering.

Networks are an important mechanism to support KMb. A number of KMb networks support professional knowledge brokers and the practice of KMb. ResearchImpact-RéseauImpact Recherche (RIR) is Canada's KMb network. Led by York University in Toronto, and pioneered by the work of David Phipps, it includes knowledge brokers from York University, Memorial University of Newfoundland and Labrador, Université du Québec à Montréal, Université de Montréal, Carleton University, University of Guelph, University of Saskatchewan, Kwantlen Polytechnic University, University of Victoria, McMaster University, and University of New Brunswick. (DRUSSA) is a network of 24 universities developing professional supports for research uptake (=KMb). The Canadian (KTECoP) has over 800 members and has chapters in Toronto, Ottawa and Vancouver. Ed Comms (www.educationcommunities.org) is the open to all knowledge mobilization network supported by a world wide network universities and educational organisations that form the Education Futures Collaboration (www.edfuturescollaboration.org). A core goal of Ed Comms is to link researchers and research users and to support educators to find others interested in collaborative working particularly to scale up small scale research so that educational research can be more impactful.

Movements such as open access and open data can play a positive role in KMb. Access to scholarly research and data sets has increased partly as a result of these movements, as well as greater digitization and dissemination of resources by government and NGOs. However, many institutions do not yet make their research publicly available, lack an open access repository or directory, or have well organized websites for posting research-based resources. However access to research is not nearly sufficient for Knowledge Mobilization, as the main barriers to research use are less a matter of knowing than they are of the capacity and motivation to use that knowledge in practice.

The field of KMb has been developing for about 50 years now. A good review of this work is in Estabrooks et al. (2008) There are many excellent research articles examining research utilization. In 2007, Sandra Nutley and colleagues from the Research Unit for Research Utilization (RURU) at the University of Edinburgh published one of the most comprehensive guides to KMb, "Using Evidence: How Research Can Inform Public Services", which identifies three interacting domains: research production, research use, and the intermediary process that links these two domains. This book provides an extensive review of the literature on research utilization from traditional constructs to contemporary design, from the practice and policy perspectives, and examines strategies to enhance research utilization and measure the impact of research use.

Many resources regarding this field, including definitions, conceptual models and links to other organizations, can be found on the website of the RSPE team at the University of Toronto's Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE) and at KMbeing.com. A recent review of current research in knowledge mobilization can be found in the London Review of Education.




