Crime of aggression

A crime of aggression is a specific type of crime where a person plans, initiates, or executes an act of aggression using state military force that violates the Charter of the United Nations. The act is judged as a violation based on its character, gravity, and scale.

Acts of aggression include invasion, military occupation, annexation by the use of force, bombardment, and military blockade of ports.

The crime of aggression is a crime under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The definitions and the conditions for the exercise of jurisdiction over this crime were adopted by consensus on 11 June 2010 at the Kampala Review Conference by the States Parties to the Court.

In 1998, at the Rome Conference that adopted the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court ("the Statute"), the crime was included as one of the crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court (Article 5.1) and over which any State that becomes party to the Statute accepts the Court's jurisdiction (Article 12.1). However, participants to the Rome Conference could not agree on the definition of the crime nor on further conditions for the Court's exercise of jurisdiction; the Statute did not allow the Court to exercise such jurisdiction until these outstanding issues were solved (Article 5.2). At the 2010 Review Conference ("the Conference"), States Parties agreed by consensus to adopt resolution RC/Res.6 accepting the amendments to the Statute adding the definition of the crime and the conditions for the exercise of jurisdiction over this crime.


Under the Statute, the definition of "crime of aggression" is stated as follows:

Under the Statute, the conditions for the exercise of jurisdiction for the "crime of aggression" by the Court are as defined below. With these provisions, the Court may exercise its jurisdiction over the "crime of aggression" in one or all of the following ways.

Exercise of jurisdiction over the crime of aggression (State referral, proprio motu)

Exercise of jurisdiction over the crime of aggression (Security Council referral)

Since the amendments on the crime of aggression were adopted under Article 121.5, they enter into force for each ratifying State individually. In addition, the amendments require two further conditions to be fulfilled for the Court to exercise jurisdiction, both for state referrals and "proprio motu" investigations (15 bis) and for Security Council referrals (15 ter):
At the 16th annual session of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Treaty, it was decided to activate jurisdiction of the Crime of Aggression starting July 17, 2018.

As of 29 November 2017, thirty-four (34) State Parties have ratified or acceded to the amendments to the Rome Statute. 
On 8 May 2012, Liechtenstein ratified the Amendments on the crime of aggression to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court thereby becoming the first state to ratify the amendments. On 13 January 2013, the amendments were ratified by Luxembourg, the first current non-permanent member of the Security Council to do so. Luxembourg also became the first state to implement the amendments into domestic legislation. because it has revised its criminal code and its code of criminal procedure in February 2012. During the High-Level Week of the United Nations General Assembly from 25–26 September 2013, the amendments were also ratified by Andorra, Cyprus, Slovenia, and Uruguay, respectively.
The states parties are shown in alphabetical order according to their official name within the Assembly of States Parties.

"See" Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court for the list of states parties to the amendments.

Liechtenstein, which served the Presidency of the Review Conference, issued a statement upon ratification to the amendments:
At the Review Conference, Japan issued two statements before and after the adoption of the amendments took place:

In 2006, the House of Lords ruled in the case or "R v Jones" that the crime of aggression did not exist in English law as it applied within the United Kingdom.

After its formal participation in the Review Conference as Observer, on 15 June 2010 the United States government held a special briefing on the Conference outlining what they deemed as accomplishments.

The following article(s) are related with the adopted amendments concerning the provision on "crime of aggression".

Exercise of jurisdiction




