Dissolution of Russia

The possible dissolution of Russia (Dissorus) is a hypothetical disintegration of the Russian Federation as a single state, as well as opinions and analysis of the consequences of this event.

The topic is the subject of hundreds of articles on the Internet.

Russia, like many other countries, is experiencing both integration and disintegration processes, and the latter are threatening the collapse of the country. This topic was actively discussed by E. Kholmogorov, G. Kasparov, M. Leontiev, P. Svyatenkov, K. Remchukov, K. Rodionov, A. Eliseev, I. Prokopenko, G. Gref, M. Kalashnikov, M. Remizov, M. Delyagin, A. Fursov, G. Malinetsky, V. Solovey, S. Kurginyan, A. Prokhanov, N. Narochnitskaya, V. Averyanov, V. Tretyakov, I. Yakovenko, D. Medvedev.

In Russian history, there were two periods during which significant territories fell away from its control. The first is the disintegration of the Russian Empire as a result of the February and October revolutions in 1917–1921. Active disintegration processes began in the economy, social structure, public and political spheres of the Russian Empire, which ultimately led to the end of the Tsarist regime and became parts of independent states as Poland, Finland and Romania. The second is the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1990–1991 which led to the independence of the 15 republics of the USSR (Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Moldova, Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan).

In the 1990s, a number of regions wanted to secede from the Russian Federation: the Chechen Wars (with the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria), the Republic of Tatarstan, which finally became part of Russia only in the mid-1990s, can also be attributed to the disintegration processes which, nevertheless, managed to be stopped.

Chief researcher, Institute of philosophy RAS V. Shevchenko when evaluating review articles O. Yu. Maslova "the Collapse of Russia in the early XXI century in the statements of contemporaries," notes that it contains a large collection of articles of authors on the theme of disintegration of Russia — from the diehard supporters of the idea that the collapse of Russia is almost inevitable and has already begun to supporters of the idea of artificial and deliberate attempts of the collapse of the country.

The main reason for the disintegration processes and the possible collapse of Russia according To V. Shevchenko's review work "the Future of Russia: Strategies for philosophical understanding" is the lack of a national idea or project (such as communism in the USSR) that would unite all the people of Russia. Russian statehood is in a transitional state, in which all processes have become more active: both integration and disintegration.

Accompanying reasons for the possible collapse of Russia in the work of V. Shevchenko are listed: xenophobic sentiments ("Russia for Russians"), the desire of the ethnic groups in Russia to separatism, the transformation of national republics into full-fledged States.

In a report to the Izborsky club, a group of analysts led by A. Kobyakov named the lines of division in modern Russian society that could potentially lead to the collapse of the state: socio-economic inequality, interethnic relations, alienation of elites from the people, and opposition of the "creative class" to the rest of society.

Culturologist I. Yakovenko believes that the main reason for the disintegration processes is the uneven process of market modernization in different regions of Russia, which increases the economic isolation of these regions from each other. Yakovenko identifies the following regions into which, in his opinion, the Russian Federation may break up: North and South of Russia, Siberia, the North Caucasus and the intercontinental border.

In V. Shevchenko's article, the opinion is given that the disintegration has actually already begun, and its signs are: legal extraterritoriality, displacement of persons of a non-titular nation in national republics from the state apparatus, and radicalization of Islam.

According to mathematician Georgiy Malinetsky, there are some possible reasons for the collapse of Russia:

In an interview with the magazine "Expert" in April 2005, the head of the presidential administration, Dmitry Medvedev said:

In 2011, during a meeting of the government Commission for the development of the North Caucasian Federal District in Gudermes, Vladimir Putin said what would happen if the Caucasus suddenly left Russia:




