CERN Courier

CERN Courier (or sometimes CERN Courier: International Journal of High Energy Physics) is a monthly trade magazine covering current developments in high-energy physics and related fields worldwide. It was established in 1959. Since October 1998 the magazine has been published by IOP Publishing on behalf of CERN. Up to volume 45 no. 5 (2005) the magazine was published both in English and French. The French edition was published under the title Courrier CERN : Revue internationale de la physique des hautes énergies. Currently it is a single-language edition where articles are published either in French or English with an abstract in the other language, although most articles are in English. "CERN Courier" is distributed to member-state governments, institutes and laboratories affiliated with CERN, and to their personnel. It is published monthly, except for January and August. The views expressed are not necessarily those of the CERN management.

The first editor, Roger Anthoine, started "CERN Courier" with an initial print run of 1000, and by the time he had to put it on hold, little more than a year later, the number had already risen to 3000. In 2015 some 21,000 copies are printed 10 times a year and the journal has a massive readership online. Over the years, particularly with the advent of the CERN Bulletin in 1965, "CERN Courier" evolved from being a house publication to become a scientific journal. The "Courier" thus became the ambassador of CERN and particle physics to a large community of knowledgeable specialists and inquisitive people, having been rebranded in 1974 with the subtitle "International Journal of High-Energy Physics".

In addition to news and events, "CERN Courier" will often present cover pieces on influential physicists or retrospectives of significant historical moments in high-energy-physics history. Book reviews, white papers, obituaries, and product releases are also featured in the magazine.
The "CERN Courier" has been published regularly since the start, apart from the period April 1960 to January 1962 when the magazine "hibernated" owing to unfortunate circumstances. 
The magazine has been edited by the following editors:



