Gallery of named graphs

Some of the finite structures considered in graph theory have names, sometimes inspired by the graph's topology, and sometimes after their discoverer. A famous example is the Petersen graph, a concrete graph on 10 vertices that appears as a minimal example or counterexample in many different contexts.

The strongly regular graph on "v" vertices and rank "k" is usually denoted srg("v,k",λ,μ).

A symmetric graph is one in which there is a symmetry (graph automorphism) taking any ordered pair of adjacent vertices to any other ordered pair; the Foster census lists all small symmetric 3-regular graphs. Every strongly regular graph is symmetric, but not vice versa.

The complete graph on formula_1 vertices is often called the "formula_1-clique" and usually denoted formula_3, from German "komplett".

The complete bipartite graph is usually denoted formula_4. For formula_5 see the section on star graphs. The graph formula_6 equals the 4-cycle formula_7 (the square) introduced below. 

The cycle graph on formula_1 vertices is called the "n-cycle" and usually denoted formula_9. It is also called a "cyclic graph", a "polygon" or the "n-gon". Special cases are the "triangle" formula_10, the "square" formula_7, and then several with Greek naming "pentagon" formula_12, "hexagon" formula_13, etc.

The friendship graph "F" can be constructed by joining "n" copies of the cycle graph "C" with a common vertex.

In graph theory, the term fullerene refers to any 3-regular, planar graph with all faces of size 5 or 6 (including the external face). It follows from Euler's polyhedron formula, "V" – "E" + "F" = 2 (where "V", "E", "F" indicate the number of vertices, edges, and faces), that there are exactly 12 pentagons in a fullerene and "h" = "V"/2 – 10 hexagons. Therefore "V" = 20 + 2"h"; "E" = 30 + 3"h". Fullerene graphs are the Schlegel representations of the corresponding fullerene compounds.

An algorithm to generate all the non-isomorphic fullerens with a given number of hexagonal faces has been developed by G. Brinkmann and A. Dress. G. Brinkmann also provided a freely available implementation, called fullgen.

The complete graph on four vertices forms the skeleton of the tetrahedron, and more generally the complete graphs form skeletons of simplices. The hypercube graphs are also skeletons of higher-dimensional regular polytopes.

A snark is a bridgeless cubic graph that requires four colors in any proper edge coloring. The smallest snark is the Petersen graph, already listed above.

A star "S" is the complete bipartite graph "K". The star "S" is called the claw graph.

The wheel graph "W" is a graph on "n" vertices constructed by connecting a single vertex to every vertex in an ("n" − 1)-cycle.


