Massacres of Keqëkolle and Prapashticë

Massacres of Keqëkolle and Prapashticë () were a series of massacres committed by Serbian troops of the Third Army, in the region of Gallapi, in the village Keqekolla, in Pristina, Kosovo, on January 10, 1921.
The battalions was led by Radovan Radonić and Bozhidar Paunovic who, prior to the massacre, had committed several atrocities in the villages Popovë, Majac, Lupc, Bellopojë, Tërrnavë, Sharban, Koliq, Keqekollë, Ballaban and Prapashticë. On Januar 10, 1921, Serbian soldiers entered into Mulla Ademis house and forced him to watch as they beheaded his whole family. The massacred included: his wife Mihrije Emërllahu, (68), his son Mehmet Emërllahu (30), Hasime Emërllahu (the sons wife), Selime Adem Emërllahu, Tahire Adem Emërllahu, Mustafë Adem Emërllahu, and a baby in a cradle. Afterwards, Mulla Ademi was beheaded too and the bodies were cut to pieces and burned.

Among the massacred was Mulla Ademi Emërllahu (1850-1921), an Albanian author, scholar and imam, who was forced to watch along as 9 family members were beheaded, before being beheaded himself. A total number of 1020 Albanian civlians were massacred, carried out by Colonel Radovan Radonić and Bozhidar Paunovic. Of Mulla Ademis family, only one boy survived who was not present at the moment. It is believed that between 1020 and 1600 Albanians were killed in total that day. The month was called "Black January" afterwards by the locals.

After the massacre, the Serbian troops gathered all boys and men in the ages of 15-70 from the villages of Kurtaj, Qorraj, Çelaj, Myftaraj, Spahijaj, Balaj, to the town square where they were massacred, numbering 1020 Albanians. The family of Gjaka were forced to wait outside as the Serb soldiers filled the house with hay and set it ablaze. The mother in the family tried to rescue the baby by throwing out the window. The soldiers continued to throw it back inside the house. After the baby was thrown out, the Serb soldiers shot and bayonetted it on the street.


