Kongpo

Kongpo () is a region in Gongbo'gyamda County, Nyingchi Prefecture. It is situated on the Nyang River, a northern tributary of the Yarlung Tsangpo River.

Kongpo Drula Gonpa is the oldest and largest monastery in the region, founded by KhenChen Dawa Sangpo in 14th centurie. Kongpo Drula KhenChen is the highest Lama of Kongpo tribe.
Kongpo was an area of southeastern Tibet in the premodern period. Tsagong was one of the holy places of Kongpo and still is. Thang Tong Gyalpo, a famous architect and yogi, founded Manmogang Monastery, where the original Samding Dorje Phagmo died. Nearby are the mines from which Thang Tong Gyalpo obtained the iron for some of his bridges.

Old Tsari is now part of the modern county of Lhuntse in the southeast of the Tibet Autonomous Region and including parts of neighboring areas of India, and New Tsari is located farther east.




Kumbum

A Kumbum ( "one hundred thousand holy images") is a multi-storied aggregate of Buddhist chapels in Tibetan Buddhism. The most famous Kumbum forms part of Palcho Monastery.

The first Kumbum was founded in the fire sheep year 1427 by a Gyantse prince. It has nine "lhakang"s or levels, is high surmounted by a golden dome, and contains 77 chapels which line its walls. Many of the statues were damaged during the Cultural Revolution but have since been replaced with clay images, though they lack the artistic merit of the originals. The 14th century murals showing Newar and Chinese influences, survived much better.

The Kumbum or great "gomang" ("many-doored") stupa at Gyantse is a three-dimensional mandala meant to portray the Buddhist cosmos. The Kumbum, like other mandalas, which are portrayed by a circle within a square, enables the devotee to take part in the Buddhist perception of the universe and can depict one's potential as they move through it. Mandalas are meant to aid an individual on the path to enlightenment. The Kumbum holds a vast number of images of deities throughout its structure with Vajradhara (Sanskrit:Vajradhāra, Tibetan: rdo rje 'chang (Dorje Chang), English: Vajraholder), the cosmic Buddha, at the top.

The best known Kumbum is the Gyantse Kumbum, built in 1497 by a prince of Gyantse, but there are other surviving examples at Jonang, built by Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen and consecrated in 1333, and the Chung Riwoche Kumbun at Päl Riwoche, which was built by Thang Tong Gyalpo, who began work on it in 1449. A further one is at Kumbum Monastery near Xining in Qinghai. The Great Stupa of Universal Compassion being built near Bendigo, Australia is modelled on the Gyantse Kumbum.



