Marquis of Sui's pearl

The Marquis of Sui's pearl or Chinese Suihouzhu (隨侯珠) was a famous gemstone in a Warring States period (475-221 BCE) folktale about a ruler of Sui state who was given an amazing luminous pearl by a grateful snake whose life he had saved. In the history of folkloristics, this legend is the earliest known example of the "Grateful Animals" motif. The Marquis of Sui's pearl, which is frequently paired with another famous regalia, the Heshibi, became a literary Chinese metaphor for underestimating a valuable person or thing.

Many Chinese classics refer to the Marquis of Sui's pearl in context with other legendary gems, jades, and swords associated with the ceremonial regalia of ancient Chinese states.

Suíhóuzhū (隨侯珠, "the Marquis of Sui's pearl") has a literary synonym Suíhóuzhīzhū (隨侯之珠) with the Classical Chinese grammatical possessive affix "zhī" (之). Suí (隨, lit. "follow; pursue; comply with; adapt to") is the name of a small ancient state during the Shang and Western Zhou dynasties, located in present-day Suizhou, Hubei—not to be confused with the Sui dynasty (隋, 581–618 CE). Sui was originally one of the Ji states (11th-7th centuries BCE) and became a vassal state of Chu (Hawkes 1985: 336) . The rulers of Sui held the Chinese feudal title Hóu (侯), the second of five Zhou dynasty peerage ranks. This is usually translated as English "Marquis" or "Marquess", but more generally means an "honorific term applied in pre-imperial times to all rulers of states, regardless of actual rank" (Kroll 2017: 162). Alternate translations of "Suihou" include "Duke Sui" (Mei 1929: 215; DeWoskin and Crump 1996: 239) and "Lord Sui" (Knechtges 1987: 312). Zhū (珠, "pearl; gem; bead; orb") is used in many Chinese names for shining pearls/gems, such as "yèmíngzhū" (夜明珠, "night-luminous pearl"), "yèguāngzhū" (夜光珠, "night-shining pearl"), and "míngyuèzhū" (明月珠, "luminous-moon pearl"), which is exemplified by Marquis of Sui's pearl.

"Suihouzhu" ("Marquis of Sui's pearl") frequently occurs in context with one of the most famous jades of Chinese antiquity, Héshìbì (和氏璧) or Héshìzhībì (和氏之璧, both meaning "Clan He's jade-disk").
Bian He 卞和 was a man from the late Warring States Period [8th century BCE] who came upon a stone containing a rare piece of jade. However, when he presented it to King Li of Chu, it was judged to be a fake, and he was punished by having his left foot cut off. Not deterred, Bian He presented the stone again when King Wu took the throne. It was again judged to be a fake, and Bian He suffered the loss of his right foot. He was so distraught that he withdrew to the foot of a mountain, clutching his jade, and cried until he wept blood. This so moved King Wu that he ordered the stone reexamined. When cut and polished it was shown to be a rare treasure. (Ivanhoe 2009: 164) 
When Bian He is read as a typical Chinese name, "Biàn" (卞, lit. "law; rule; impetuous; impatient") is the surname and "Hé" (和, "harmonious; agreeable; comfortable") is the given name. However, "He" is also an uncommon surname and early texts refer to Bian He as both "Bianshi" (卞氏, "(of) Bian clan") and "Heshi" (和氏, "(of) He clan"), with the word shì (氏, "clan; family; [a suffix after surnames]"). Bì (璧, "carved jade-disk with a round hole in center") is an ancient Chinese artifact, which first became important grave goods in the Liangzhu culture (3400–2250 BCE). "Bi" were "often used ceremonially as symbolic of a covenant or guarantee, as between persons, states, heaven and a dynastic house, etc." (Kroll 2017: 17).

Tài'ē or Tài'ā (太阿) is the name of a legendary 5th century BCE sword. The master bladesmith Ou Yezi made three iron swords for King Goujian (r. 496–465 BCE) of Yue, named Lóngyuān (龍渊, Dragon Gulf), Tài'ē (泰阿, Great Riverbank), and Gōngbù (工布, Artisanal Display). Master Ou described the patterning on Tai'e to the king, "it is majestic and vigorous, like the waves of a flowing river." (tr. Milburn 2010: 285).

Chinese mythology and folkore associate snakes with dragons. Marquis of Sui's snake with a glowing pearl in its mouth is echoed in later Chinese depictions of dragons with a flaming pearl or gem under their chin or in their claws. According to the German anthropologist Wolfram Eberhard, the "long" dragon symbolizes clouds and rainstorms, and when it plays with a ball or pearl, this signifies the swallowing of the moon by the clouds or thunder in the clouds. The moon frequently appears as a pearl, and thus the dragon with the pearl is equal to the clouds with the moon. The pearl-moon relationship is expressed in the ancient belief that at full moon pearls are solid balls and at new moon they are hollow (1968: 239, 382). Li Shizhen's 1578 "Bencao Gangmu" pharmacopeia describes a "shenlong" Divine Dragon holding in its mouth "leizhu" (雷珠, "thunder pearls/beads") that would "light the entire house at night" (tr. Laufer 1912: 64).

The grateful snake kills its benefactor in some later iterations of the Marquis of Sui's theme (Eberhard 1968: 381). For instance, the Chinese folktale of "The Greedy Minister and the Serpent" concerns a schoolboy who found a snake egg and lovingly cared for his pet serpent until he was a young man preparing to take the imperial examination in the capital. He asked the snake for a present in exchange for his kindness and it spat up a huge pearl that brightly shone in the dark. After receiving the highest "jinshi" degree in the exam, the man was appointed to a prestigious position, but he was dissatisfied and cunningly presented his marvelous pearl to the emperor, who was so delighted that he appointed him grand chancellor. Yet the covetous minister still wanted more wealth, so he went into the mountains where the snake lived, and demanded more pearls, whereupon the snake opened its mouth wide and swallowed him (McNamee 2000: 26-28; cf. Bashe).

Legends about animals that carry a marvelous jewel either in their forehead or in their mouth are found almost worldwide. In only a relative few of these legends is the stone luminous, this variant being known in ancient Greece, India, Ceylon, and Armenia (Ball 1938: 502), see luminous gemstones for details.

In Western mythology and folklore, there is a theme of injured animals presenting magical gems out of gratitude to people who helped them. This is a subcategory of Grateful Animals folktale motif (Aarne–Thompson classification systems 554), for example, The White Snake or The Queen Bee. The Chinese Warring States period legend of the Marquis of Sui's pearl is the earliest known example of a Grateful Animal story about repaying a debt in gratitude to a human being (Zhang 2014: 101).

Numerous Warring States period (c. 475-221 BCE) and Han dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE) texts mention Marquis of Sui's pearl as a metaphor for something important or valuable, but without reference to the grateful snake tale, which implies that it was common knowledge among contemporary readers. The following textual examples are in roughly chronological order, and limited to texts with reliable English translations.

The c. 5th-century BCE "Chunqiu" (Spring and Autumn Annals) official history of Lu state and its c. 4th century BCE "Zuo zhuan" commentary mentions two unnamed marquises of Sui in 706 to 690 and 537 BCE, but do not mention pearls.

The "Chunqiu" records that when the Zhou ruler Duke Ai of Qin (r. 536-501 BCE) was enthroned in 537, "The viscount of Chu, the marquises of Chen and Sui, and the baron of Xu, laid siege to [the capital of] Cai." (Legge 1872: 793). The "Zuo zhuan" commentary suggests that the viscount had rewarded the marquis of Sui "as a peer of the kingdom" for his previous military assistance to Chu and called him "now to take the field as one of the other princes." (Legge 1872: 794).

The "Zuo zhuan" also mentions an earlier marquis of Sui during the reign of Duke Huan of Lu (r. 711-694 BCE). It records that in 706 BCE King Wu of Chu ordered the sudden invasion of Sui in a scheme to prevent an alliance with the other vassal states of Chu. After peace negotiations, Chu prime minister Dou Bobi (鬬伯比) concluded that Sui might conspire against Chu, and warned the marquis "to cultivate good government, and be friendly with the States of your brother princes; then perhaps you will escape calamity." The marquis was afraid, and "attended properly to his duties of government; and Chu did not dare to attack him." (tr. Legge 1872: 48-49). In the summer of 704 BCE, after Sui failed to attend a meeting of Chu's vassal states, King Wu personally led his army in an attack on Sui and defeated them in the Battle of Suqi (速杞). After the marquis escaped, Chu captured his war-chariot and the entire chariot division, and the states came to a peace agreement (tr. Legge 1872: 52). The final "Zuo zhuan" reference to the marquis of Sui is in 690 BCE when King Wu died during another invasion of Sui and his Chu officials "made a covenant" with the marquis (Legge 1872: 77).

The c. 4th-3rd centuries BCE "Mozi" ([Sayings of] Master Mo) mentions Marquis of Sui's pearl and Mr. He's jade-disk with the legendary Nine Tripod Cauldrons, namely, a set of Chinese ritual bronze "ding" "tripod cauldrons", said to have been cast by mythical Yu the Great after controlling the Great Flood. In response to criticism from his disciple Wu Mazi (巫馬子) that "To leave contemporaries alone and to praise the early kings is to praise rotten bones", Mozi (c. 470-391 BCE) explains how a state's "yi" ("righteousness; justice") is more important its ritual treasures.
Motse said: The jade of Ho, the pearl of Duke Sui, and the nine tings—these are what the feudal lords value as excellent treasures. Can they enrich the country, multiply the people, put the government in order, and place the state in safety? Of course they cannot. Excellent treasures are to be valued for their efficacy. Now since the jade of Ho, the pearl of Duke Sui, and the nine tings cannot benefit men, then they are not the excellent treasures in the world. On the other hand, if righteousness is employed in the government of the state the population will be increased, the government will be in order, and the state will be secure. The excellent treasures are to be valued for their efficacy. Now righteousness can benefit men. So then righteousness is the excellent treasure of the world. (11, tr. Mei 1929: 215-216) 

The 3rd-century BCE "Zhanguo ce" (Strategies of the Warring States), which is a compendium of political and military anecdotes dating from 490 to 221 BCE, mentions Marquis of Sui's pearl along with an otherwise unknown treasure, the "Chiqiu zhi huan" (持丘之環, "Chiqiu jade bracelet/armband"). King Wuling of Zhao (r. 325–299 BCE) summoned Zheng Tong (鄭同) for an audience and asked how to avoid warfare with neighboring feudal states. Zheng replied, 
Well, let us suppose there is a man who carries with him the pearl of Sui-hou [隨侯之珠] and the Ch'ih-ch'iu armband [持丘之環] as well as goods valued at ten thousand in gold. Now he stops the night in an uninhabited place. [Since he has neither weapons nor protectors,] It is clear he will not spend more than a night abroad before someone harms him. At the moment there are powerful and greedy states on your majesty's borders and they covet your land. … If you lack weapons your neighbours, of course, will be quite satisfied. (tr. Crump 1970: 327). 

The c. 239 BCE "Lüshi Chunqiu" (Master Lü's Spring and Autumn Annals) is an encyclopedic text compiled under the patronage of the Qin dynasty Chancellor Lü Buwei. This book and the "Zhuangzi" have almost identical descriptions of using the marquis of Sui's pearl as a crossbow pellet in order illustrate foolishly losing much and gaining little.
As a general principle, whenever a sage is about to initiate anything, he is certain to consider carefully how his means relate to what he hopes to achieve. Now if a man were to use the pearl of the Marquis of Sui [隨侯之珠] as a pellet to shoot at a sparrow a thousand yards up in the air, the world would surely ridicule him. Why is that? Because what he used as shot was so valuable, while what he wanted was so trifling. And, surely, life is much more valuable than the pearl of the Marquis of Sui! (tr. Knoblock and Riegel 2000: 82) 

The c. 3rd-1st centuries BCE Daoist "Zhuangzi" ([Writings of] Master Zhuang) reiterates the story of shooting at a distant sparrow with the marquis's pearl.
Whenever the sage makes a movement, he is certain to examine what his purpose is and what he is doing. If now, however, we suppose that there was a man who shot at a sparrow a thousand yards away with the pearl of the Marquis of Sui [隨侯之珠], the world would certainly laugh at him. Why is this? It is because what he uses is important and what he wants is insignificant. And is not life much more important than the pearl of the Marquis of Sui? (tr. Mair 1994: 288). 

Comparing these four matching sentences in the "Lüshi Chunqiu" and "Zhuangzi", the first sentence is identical in both versions. The "Zhuangzi" adds one more character in the second and five more in the third, while the "Lüshi Chunqiu" has one more character in the fourth sentence.

The c. 3rd-1st century BCE "Chuci" (Songs of Chu) poetry anthology collectively refers to Marquis Sui's pearl and Bian He's jade-disk ("Suihe" 隨和), and to the Tai'e sword. The "Quenching the Light" poem begins,
