Hong Kong Reincarnated – New Lo Ting Archaeological Find

Hong Kong Reincarnated – New Lo Ting Archaeological Find was an exhibition held at the Hong Kong Art Centre from 20 June – 14 July 1998. Oscar Ho, the curator, considered the Lo Ting (a fictional tribe of half-man, half-fish creatures) as a purported ancestor of the Tanka tribes from whom the indigenous Hong Kongers descended. Drawing inspiration from archaeological findings, anthropological interpretations of myths and stories, paleobiological data, and literature sources, the curator invited artists to create “tangible and intangible evidence” of the Lo Ting and outlined an alternative version of local histories. It was the second installment of a series of Lo Ting exhibitions. The history of Lo Ting was first presented in the exhibition "Museum 97: History, Community, Individual" (23 June - 12 July 1997, Hong Kong Art Centre). "Hong Kong Reincarnated – New Lo Ting Archaeological Find" was an ambitious attempt to further elaborate on the historical narratives of the mythical creature that enabled visitors to decipher the historical discourses and the processes related to local identities.

According to "New Narratives of Guangdong" by the Qing scholar Qu Dajun, the Lo Ting, a half-man, half-fish hybrid, were living around the Lantau Island area. The aquatic creatures looked human with yellowish-dark eyes and bodies covered with short, brownish hair. The story tells of a man who brought a female Lo Ting onto the land, offering her food and clothes and teaching her to talk. Curiously, Lo Ting does not appreciate such kindness and wants to return to the sea, choosing an "uncivilised form of living".

In creating a fictional but convincing narrative, this exhibition intended to adopt a disembodied, omniscient voice of authority, to offer “objective” readings of the presence and absence of archaeological findings. First, it addressed participating artists as members from Team 20, a department of excavation affiliated with the Research Centre of Ancient History in Nanhai. They were assigned to be involved in the curatorial process at different organisations, such as the fictional Hong Kong Lo Ting Research Association and Friends of Lo Ting. These “unofficial organisations” were ingenious appropriations of the academic units that had conducted surveys and investigations on Chek Lap Kok Island, the archaeological site of the rich relics from the Middle Neolithic period, about 6,000 years ago.

The curatorial team meticulously designed the exhibition space to look like a modernist museum. Exhibits were shown in glass cases with wooden frames and miniature models, and maps were used to illustrate the geographical environment of the Lo Ting settlements. The “artifacts” were framed within the disciplinary context of archaeology, using photographs, diagrams, documents, and scientific data (such as the measurements of objects) to demonstrate how the artifacts were excavated and to depict their historical significance. By blurring the boundaries between historical facts and imaginative fabrication, many of the creative works were flawed in some way to allow audiences to question the “museum presentation” as a constructed convention. Thus, it created a condition for audiences to examine, verify, and interpret the historical narratives based on their thoughts and beliefs.

The artists include AU Kawai, CHAN Chihang, CHAN Kachun, HO Yuenleung, LAU Ying, LEUNG Wanyee Janice, LIU Chiwai, Luke CHING, NG Chiwai, NG Tszkwan, NG Waiming, SHEK Mingfai Phil, SIT Likhoi, WAN Laikuen Annie, YAN Patto, YAU Puiwah, YEUNG Waikeung, and YU Chiushan.

HA Bik Chuen Archive"," (1998) Hong Kong Reincarnated: New Lo Ting Archaeological Find (Set of 51 photographs) Accessed on 23 November 2019.

HO, Hingkay, Oscar, "et al". (1997) "Museum 97: History, Community, Individual". Hong Kong: Hong Kong Arts Centre.

HO, Hingkay Oscar (1998) "Hong Kong Reincarnated – New Lo Ting Archaeological Find". Hong Kong: Hong Kong Arts Centre.

HO, Hingkay Oscar (1999) “Invented History”, in Ho, O. and Wear, E. (eds), "Hong Kong Art Review" (Hong Kong: The International Association of Art Critics), 46-53.

HO, Hingkay Oscar (2016) "Critical Curatorship", "UNESCO Observatory Multi-Disciplinary Journal in the Arts" 5:2, 1-13.

HO, Hingkay Oscar (2016) "Deconstruct and Edit: Oscar Ho on the Art of Curating". Hong Kong: MMCM Creations.

Para Site Art Space (2004) "Mapping Identities: The Art and Curating of Oscar Ho". Hong Kong: Para Site Art Space.

WONG, Michelle, (2017) "What Two Hong Kong Exhibitions Reveal about the Handover, Identity, and Contemporary Art", "IDEAS: AAA Online Journal" Accessed on 23 November 2019.


