Tree of Peace (World War I)

The Tree of Peace (Slovak: "Strom pokoja", Russian: "Дерево мира", German: "Der Friedensbaum") is an international project that originated in Slovakia. The project, created on the occasion of the 100th Anniversary of the end of World War I, was initiated by landscape architect Marek Sobola from Žilina, Slovakia. The main goal of the project is to promote a message of peace by planting the "Tree of Peace" on every continent within 4 years (2018 – 2022); because the war lasted for 4 years, this project is also planned to last for 4 years.

World War I had an impact on Sobola's family. His great-grandfather Ondrej Sobola (Andreas Szobola) died on the Russian battlefield. Ondrej was born on August 7, 1880, in the village of Lalinok near Žilina (then Lalinek, Kingdom of Hungary). He was enlisted in the 15th Military Infantry Regiment and went missing in 1915. Ondrej died in an unknown place. He was officially pronounced dead in 1930, with an official date of death: December 31, 1918. The story of the author's family inspired him to memorialize the soldiers who died in WWI in unknown places without their names or identities. This international project “Tree of Peace” officially represents the Slovak Republic under the brand called “GOOD IDEA SLOVAKIA – IDEAS FROM SLOVAKIA”. The Trademark License is granted by the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic.

Project has the ambition to be a universal message of joining the nations. It may be paradoxical that on one side the war separated the nations in the past but on the other side it also joined nations through military alliances. In the future, the project will not be strictly linked to 1918 and the WWI, but rather generally to the need for peace and avoidance of global military conflicts. In this way, the project will become universal and its application will be made available to countries which were touched by the WWI only marginally. But the author does not exclude the allusion to this global military conflict because thanks to it the Project itself began. This Project is European, international and strictly apolitical. The main idea of the project is a Message of Peace.

"Let´s make love the lifeblood of this world" (Slovak: ""Urobme láskavosť miazgou tohto sveta")". 

United Kingdom


Slovakia


Germany


Serbia


United States


Slovakia


Russia


Poland


Austria


As the umbrella organization for the Tree of Peace project, civic association Servare et Manere can recognise important personalities who treasure peace, freedom and mutual understanding and acknowledge the ipmportance of initiatives which serve to enhance the welfare of everyone in society. Servare et Manere honour al those who have made a special contribution to the promotion of understanding between peoples and the bringing together of nations. Three awards are currently awarded:


The Slovak Post issued official postmarks on this occasion:


