Military-entertainment complex

The military-entertainment complex is the cooperation between the military and entertainment industries to their mutual benefit, especially in such fields as cinema, multimedia and virtual reality.

In Hollywood, many movie productions were directly supervised by the Department of Defense. Since 1989, the chief liaison between Hollywood and the DoD is Phil Strub. Directors looking to borrow Army material for their movies need to apply to the DoD, and submit their movies' scripts for vetting. Ultimately, the DoD has a say in virtually every US-made movie that use military resources in their production.

The movie "Top Gun", produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and in collaboration with the Pentagon, aimed at rebranding the US Navy's image post-Vietnam war, and attract new Navy recruits. "Top Gun" was the first full-blown collaboration between Hollywood and the US Navy. By the end of the 1980s and early 1990s, Hollywood producers were stressing script writers to create military-related plots to gain production power from the US Military.

Some US movies co-scripted with the DoD include:

The website "Spy Culture" compiled a list of 410 DoD-sponsored movies.

In 2011, Washington Post journalist David Sirota questioned if that strategy was not unconstitutional, since the DoD directly influences the outcome of movie scripts (abridging freedom of speech) and uses public material (the Army's gear paid by the tax-payers) to grow its influence in the movie industry. Cybersecurity book-author Daniel Miessler asserted that the Army is not legally authorized to recruit young people on education premises (schools, college campus, ...) because of the students' tender age and psychological vulnerability, thus underlining the Army's unethical stand when it promotes itself all over the movie industry.

Katy Perry's 2012 video clip "Part of Me", in which she signs up to join the Army, was shot at USMC Camp Pendleton in Oceanside, California, with the support of the Army.

On YouTube, a new music video genre appeared, the military music videos. Typically, these are video clips portraying singers in military gears and surrounded by military vehicles and weapons. This video genre is used by the Army across the globe (list of examples below)


The United States Air Force has an official rock band, "Max Impact", and released a punk version of its official anthem. In early 2019, the US Army released a promotional military hip hop video, "Giving all I got", with the explicit intent to get the attention of the younger crowd.

In February 2019, the armies of China and Taiwan made dueling propaganda videos, creating a music video battle. The Chinese video ("My War Eagles Are Flying Around The Treasured Island") showed Chinese jets flying over Taiwan, and Taiwan responded by showing muscles with the video clip "Freedom Isn't Free" glorifying the strength of the country's army.

In his book "From Sun Tzu to Xbox", Ed Halter wrote «The technologies that shape our culture have always been pushed forward by war». Video games «were not created directly for military purposes, [they] arose out of an intellectual environment whose existence was entirely predicated on defense research». The first known virtual military training equipment, a flight simulator made of wood, was created in the 1920s by Edward Link. Since the Second World War, the US Army and its sub-agencies played a major role in the development of digital computers. The DARPA, an agency of the DoD, contributed to the development of Advanced computing systems, computer graphics, the Internet, multiplayer networked systems, and the 3-D navigation of virtual environments.

Arguably the first video game (faux-military simulation), the PDP-1-powered "Spacewar!", was developed in 1962. The US Army's first video game created for training purposes, the board game Mech War, was implemented in the staff officer training curriculum in the 1970s at the Army War College. During the 1980s, Academic and military researchers led the development of distributed interactive simulations (DIS) that enable the creation of real-time, virtual theaters of war. The release by Atari of the game "Battlezone" was a revolution for the graphics perspective, introducing first-person shooter games for the first time. Donn A. Starry, head of the United States Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), said in a conference in 1981 : «[Today's soldiers have] learned to learn in a different world, [...] a world of television, electronic toys and games, computers, and a host of other electronic devices. They belong to a TV and technology generation... [so] how is it that our soldiers are still sitting in classrooms, still listening to lectures, still depending on books and other paper reading materials, when possibly new and better methods have been available for many years?» The Air Force captain Jack A. Thorpe developed SIMNET with DARPA, a real-time distributed networking to modernize virtual simulation capacities and enable soldiers to experience war situation in times of peace. The magazine "Wired" argued this was the real embryo of the Internet.

After the first-shooter hit "Doom" came out in 1993, the Marine Corps Modeling and Simulation Office (MCMSO) released the online Personal Computer Based Wargames Catalog where Army personnel published detailed reviews of the video games they investigated. "Doom" became the MCMSO's absolute preference, and in 1995, the game "Marine Doom" was released, and the alien-themed graphics of the game's first version was replaced by military-themed graphics.

Dave Anthony, a writer for "Call of Duty" left his job and became an "unknown conflict" adviser for the Department of Defense.

The video game "Homefront" was created by John Milius, who also wrote/directed the 1984 war film "Red Dawn" that gave its name to the Operation Red Dawn which led to the capture of Saddam Hussein.





