Definitions of Tibet

Tibet is a term for the major elevated plateau in Central Asia, north of the Himalayas. It is today mostly under the sovereignty of the People's Republic of China, primarily administered as the Tibet Autonomous Region besides (depending on the geographic definition of the term) adjacent parts of Qinghai, Gansu, Yunnan, and Sichuan.

The English name is adopted from Modern Latin "Tibetum", and is shared by all western languages.
However, the term "Tibet" is subject to many definitions and controversy over its function and territorial claims.
There isn't any clear equivalent of the English term "Tibet" in either Tibetan or Chinese; names for the region loosely corresponding to the Tibetan Plateau include the Standard Tibetan endonym "Bod" ("Bö") for "Greater Tibet", 
"Ü-Tsang" (དབུས་གཙང་ "Wü-Tsang", 烏思藏 " Wūsīzàng") for "Central Tibet", Chinese 吐蕃 "Tǔbō" or "Tǔfān" for the historical Tibetan Empire, 
西藏 "Xīzàng" "Western Tsang" for the territory of the Tibet Autonomous Region (etc.).

The English adjective "Tibetian " is first recorded only as late as 1747, when Tibet was under Qing rule (the modern form "Tibetan" is from 1822). The proper noun is first recorded in 1827, as "Thibet". 
The western name of Tibet is, however, much older, recorded in the 13th century (when Tibet was under Mongol rule) by Giovanni da Pian del Carpine and William Rubruck, as "Tebet".
William Rubruck (1253) records "Tebet" as the name of a people, situated beyond the "Tangut", characterized by their custom of mortuary cannibalism (i.e. of eating their dead parents).
The name "Tebet" appears to be a loan from an Iranian or Turkic language, perhaps Sogdian. 
In 17th-century Modern Latin, Tibet is known as "Tibetum" (also "Thibetum", "Tibet", "Thobbat", "Tubet").
The ultimate origin of the name, however, remains unclear. Suggestions include derivation from Tibetan, Turkic or Chinese.

The proposed Tibetan etymology derives the term from "Stod-bod" (pronounced "Tö-bhöt") "High/Upper Tibet" from the autonym "Bod". Andreas Gruschke's study of the Tibetan Amdo Province says,
At the beginning of the Tang dynasty's rule of China, Tibetans were called Tubo, a term that seems to be derived from "tu phod" or "stod pod" (upper Tibet). The archaic Tibetan dialects of Amdo have retained the articulation of the medieval Tibetan language; as such the pronunciation is "Töwöd", as in Mongolian tongue. Thus, the term was handed down as "Tübüt" in Turkish diction, "Tibbat" in Arabic and passed on as "Tibet" in Western languages.

The proposed Turkic etymology adduces "töbäd" "the heights" (plural of "töbän"). 
Behr (1994) cites Bazin and Hamilton (1991) to the effect that the four variant 土/吐-番/蕃 characters used to write "Tu-fan/bo" (Middle Chinese *Tʰɔʰ-buan < Old Chinese *Thaˤ-pjan) "Tibet" suggest "a purely phonetic transcription" of an underlying *"Töpün" "The Heights, Peaks" "Tibet" etymology from Old Turkish "töpä/töpü" "peak; height". He further hypothesizes that the final "-t" in "Tibet" names derives from "an Altaic collective plural which results in *Töpät, thus perfectly matching Turkish Töpüt 'Tibet'", which is attested in the Old Turkic Orkhon inscriptions.

Proposed Chinese etymology compares "Tǔfān"/"Tǔbō". The premise of the Chinese name being the primary origin of the name hinges its having had "-t" final in Middle Chinese, e.g., Eric Partridge's hypothetical "Tu-pat". 
Stein (1922) assumes that "Tufan" has the same origin as "Tibet", but not that the latter is adopted from Chinese: Instead, the Chinese name would have arisen "by assimilation with the name of the T'u-fa, a Turco-Mongol race, who must originally have been called something like Tuppat", also reflected in "Turkish and Sogdian texts" as "Tüpüt". 
The Standard or Central Tibetan endonym "Bod" "Tibet" () is pronounced , transliterated "Bhö" or "Phö".

Rolf Stein (1922) explains,
The name Tibetans give their country, "Bod" (now pronounced Pö in the Central dialect, as we have seen), was closely rendered and preserved by their Indian neighbours to the south, as Bhoṭa, Bhauṭa or Bauṭa. It has even been suggested that this name is to be found in Ptolemy and the "Periplus Maris Erythraei", a first-century Greek narrative, where the river Bautisos and a people called the Bautai are mentioned in connexion with a region of Central Asia. But we have no knowledge of the existence of Tibetans at that time.

Christopher Beckwith agrees that Ptolemy's geographic reference to the "Bautai – i.e., the "Bauts"" was "the first mention in either Western or Eastern historical sources of the native ethnonym of Tibet". He compares the 4th-century historian Ammianus Marcellinus describing the Bautai living "on the slopes of high mountains to the south" of Serica with contemporaneous Chinese sources recording a Qiang people called the Fa , anciently "pronounced something like Puat" and "undoubtedly intended to represent Baut, the name that became pronounced by seventh-century Tibetans as Bod (and now, in the modern Lhasa dialect, rather like the French "peu")."
Bod originally named the Central Tibetan region Ü-Tsang or Dbus-gtsang.
This first mention of the name Bod, the usual name for Tibet in the later Tibetan historical sources, is significant in that it is used to refer to a conquered region. In other words, the ancient name Bod originally referred only to a part of the Tibetan Plateau, a part which, together with Rtsaṅ (Tsang, in Tibetan now spelled Gtsaṅ), has come to be called Dbus-gtsaṅ (Central Tibet). 

The oldest Chinese language name for "Tibet" is 吐蕃, transliterated either pinyin "Tǔbō", Wade–Giles "T'u-po" or 
pinyin "Tǔfān", Wade–Giles "T'u-fan". Chinese 藏 "Zàng" ("Tsang") is a loan from Tibetan གཙང ("gtsang"), the name of the southwestern part of the Tibetan Plateau.
Modern "Xizang" () "Western Tsang" now specifies the "Tibet Autonomous Region".

吐蕃 "Tufan"/"Tubo" is first recorded in the "Old Book of Tang" (dated 945 CE) describing the Tibetan King Namri Songtsen ("Gnam-ri-slon-rtsan") sent two emissaries to Emperor Yang of Sui in 608 and 609.

The "Tubo" vs. "Tufan" transliteration of 吐蕃 is based on historical spellings involving four different characters:
The latter two "fān" Chinese characters are used interchangeably for "foreign" words, e.g., "fānqié" 番茄 or 蕃茄 (lit. "foreign eggplant") "tomato". "Fán" is sometimes translated as "barbarian" meaning "non-Chinese; foreign".

For the character 蕃, pre-modern Chinese dictionaries indicate only the pronunciation "fán".
According to Paul Pelliot, the pronunciation "tǔbō" was suggested by Abel Rémusat in the early 19th century, based on pronunciations of similar characters, and adopted uncritically by other European scholars.

Contemporary Chinese dictionaries disagree whether 吐蕃 "Tibet" is pronounced "Tǔbō" or "Tǔfān" – a question complicated by the homophonous slur "tǔfān" 土番 (lit. "dirt barbarians", possibly "agricultural barbarians") "barbarians; natives; aborigines". The "Hanyu Da Cidian" cites the first recorded Chinese usages of "Tǔfān" 土番 "ancient name for Tibet" in the 7th century (Li Tai 李泰) and "tǔfān" 土番 "natives (derogatory)" in the 19th century (Bi Fucheng 薜福成). Sinological linguists are engaged in ongoing debates whether 吐蕃 is "properly" pronounced "Tubo" or "Tufan". For example, "Sino-Platonic Papers" has been the venue for disputation among Victor H. Mair, Edwin G. Pulleyblank, and W. South Coblin .

The Chinese neologism "Tǔbó" 圖博 (written with "tǔ" "drawing; map" and "bó" "abundant; plentiful") avoids the problematic "Tǔfān" pronunciation, and is used by authorities such as the Central Tibetan Administration.

Stein discusses the "fan" pronunciation of "Tibet".
The Chinese, well informed on the Tibetans as they were from the seventh century onwards, rendered Bod as Fan (at that time pronounced something like B'i̭wan). Was this because the Tibetans sometimes said 'Bon' instead of 'Bod', or because 'fan' in Chinese was a common term for 'barbarians'? We do not know. But before long, on the testimony of a Tibetan ambassador, the Chinese started using the form T'u-fan, by assimilation with the name of the T'u-fa, a Turco-Mongol race, who must originally have been called something like Tuppat. At the same period, Turkish and Sogdian texts mention a people called 'Tüpüt', situated roughly in the north-east of modern Tibet. This is the form that Moslem writers have used since the ninth century (Tübbet, Tibbat, etc.). Through them it reached the medieval European explorers (Piano-Carpini, Rubruck, Marco Polo, Francesco della Penna).

This "Fan" 蕃 pronunciation of "B'i̭wan" illustrates the difference between modern Chinese pronunciation and the Middle Chinese spoken during the Sui Dynasty (581-618 CE) and Tang Dynasty (618-907 CE) period when "Tibet" was first recorded. Reconstructed Middle Chinese pronunciations of "Tǔbō" and "Tǔfān" "Tibet" are: "t'uopuâ" and "t'uop'i̭wɐn" (Bernhard Karlgren), "thwopwâ" and "thwobjwɐn" (Axel Schuessler), "tʰɔ'pa" and "tʰɔ'puan" (Edwin G. Pulleyblank "Early Middle"), or "thuXpat" and "thuXpjon" (William H. Baxter) 

Xizang 西藏 is the present-day Chinese name for "Tibet". This compound of "xi" "west" and "zàng" "storage place; treasure vault; (Buddhist/Daoist) canon (e.g., "Daozang")" is a phonetic transliteration of "Ü-Tsang", the traditional province in western and central Tibet.

"Zang" 藏 was used to transcribe the "Tsang" people as early as the Yuan Dynasty (1279–1368 CE), and "Xizang" was coined under the Qing Dynasty Jiaqing Emperor (r. 1796–1820 CE). "Zang" abbreviates "Tibet" in words such as "Zàngwén" 藏文 "Tibetan language" and "Zàngzú" 藏族 "Tibetan people".

The People's Republic of China government equates "Xīzàng" with the "Xīzàng Zìzhìqū" 西藏自治区 "Tibet Autonomous Region, TAR". The English borrowing "Xizang" from Chinese can be used to differentiate the modern "TAR" from the historical "Tibet".

When the PRC government and some Tibetologists refer to Tibet, it means the areas covering Ü-Tsang and Western Kham, which became present-day the Tibet Autonomous Region, a provincial-level entity of the People's Republic. This definition excludes the former domains of the Dalai Lamas in Amdo and eastern Kham which are part of Qinghai, Gansu, Yunnan, and Sichuan.

When the Government of Tibet in Exile and the Tibetan refugee community abroad refer to Tibet, they mean the areas consisting of the traditional provinces of Amdo, Kham, and Ü-Tsang.

The difference in definition is a major source of dispute. The distribution of Amdo and eastern Kham into surrounding provinces was initiated by the Yongzheng Emperor during the 18th century and has been continuously maintained by successive Chinese governments.

Western scholars such as anthropologist Melvyn Goldstein exclude Amdo and Kham from political Tibet:

A modern nation-state usually has clearly defined borders at which one government's authority ceases and that of another begins. In centuries past, the Tibetan and Chinese governments had strong centers from which their power radiated, and weakened with distance from the capital. Inhabitants of border regions often considered themselves independent of both. Actual control exercised over these areas shifted in favor of one government or the other over the course of time. This history is conducive to ambiguity as to what areas belonged to Tibet, or to China, or to neither, at various times.

Rob Gifford, a National Public Radio journalist, said that in 2007, the region sometimes known as "ethnographic Tibet", which includes sections of Gansu, Qinghai, and Sichuan that surround the TAR, has greater religious freedoms than the TAR since the authorities in Beijing do not perceive the Tibetan populations in the areas as having the likelihood to strive for political independence.

In spite of the changing nature of the recognised borders between the two countries over the centuries, and arguments about their positions (something common to many modern states as well), there were serious attempts from very early times to delineate the borders clearly to avoid conflict. One of the earliest such attempts was promulgated in the Sino-Tibetan treaty which was agreed on in 821/822 under the Tibetan emperor Ralpacan. It established peace for more than two decades. A bilingual account of this treaty is inscribed on a stone pillar which stands outside the Jokhang temple in Lhasa. Here is the main core of this remarkable agreement:

In more recent times the border between China and Tibet was recognised to be near the town of Batang, which marked the furthest point of Tibetan rule on the route to Chengdu:

Spencer Chapman gives a similar, but more detailed, account of this border agreement:

Mr. A. Hosie, the British Consul at Chengdu, made a quick trip from Batang to the Tibetan border escorted by Chinese authorities, in September 1904, on the promise that he would not even put a foot over the border into Tibet. He describes the border marker as being a 3½ day journey (about 50 miles or 80 km) to the south and slightly west of Batang. It was a "well-worn, four-sided pillar of sandstone, about 3 feet in height, each side measuring some 18 inches. There was no inscription on the stone, and when unthinkingly I made a movement to look for writing on the Tibetan side, the Chinese officials at once stepped in front of me and barred the road to Tibet. Looking into Tibet the eye met a sea of grass-covered treeless hills. And from the valley at the foot of the Ningching Shan [which separate the valleys of the upper Mekong from that of the Jinsha or upper Yangtse] rose smoke from the camp fires of 400 Tibetan troops charged with the protection of the frontier. There was no time to make any prolonged inspection, for the Chinese authorities were anxious for me to leave as soon as possible."

André Migot, a French doctor and explorer, who travelled for many months in Tibet in 1947, stated:

Migot, discussing the history of Chinese control of Tibet, states that it was not until the end of the 17th century that:


