Franglais

Franglais (; also Frenglish ) is a French blend referring initially to the pretentious overuse of English words by French-speakers, and afterwards, to diglossia or the macaronic mixture of the French () and English () languages.

The word "Franglais" was first attested in French in 1959, but it was popularised by the academic, novelist, and critic René Étiemble in his denunciation of the overuse of English words in French, "Parlez-vous franglais?" published in 1964. Earlier than the French term was the English label "Frenglish" first recorded in 1937. Other colloquial blends for French influenced English include: "Franglish" (recorded from 1967), "Frenchlish" (1974), and "Fringlish" (1982).

In English, "Franglais" means a combination of English and French. It evokes the linguistic concepts of mixed language and barbarism. Reasons for this blend could be caused by lexical gaps, native bilingualism, populations trying to imitate a language where they have no fluency (sometimes known as creoles/pidgins), or humorous intent. Franglais usually consists of either filling in gaps in one's knowledge of French with English words, using false friends, or speaking French which (although ostensibly "French") would not be understood by a French speaker who does not also have a knowledge of English (for example, by using a literal translation of English idiomatic phrases).

Some examples of Franglais are:

Franglais may also mean a diplomatic compromise, such as the abbreviation "UTC" for Coordinated Universal Time.

Chaucer's Prioress knew nothing of the French of Paris, but only that of Stratford-atte-Bow ('Cockney French'). Similar mixtures occur in the later stages of Law French, such as the famous defendant who "ject un brickbat a le dit Justice, que narrowly mist" ("threw a at the said Justice, which narrowly missed").

Another example in English literature is found in "Henry V" by William Shakespeare. In Act 3, Scene 4, a French princess is trying to learn English, but unfortunately, "foot" as pronounced by her maid sounds too much like (vulgar French for 'semen', or 'to have sexual intercourse' when used as a verb) and "gown" like (French for 'cunt', also used to mean 'idiot'). She decides that English is too obscene.

A literary example of the delight in occurs in Robert Surtees' "Jorrocks' Jaunts and Jollities":

The 19th-century American writer Mark Twain, in "Innocents Abroad", included the following letter to a Parisian landlord:
According to Chapman Pincher, one of Winston Churchill's family recounted how the latter, in response to obstinacy from General de Gaulle in a meeting during de Gaulle's wartime exile in London, told him, "Si vous m’opposerez je vous get riderai!"

The humourist Miles Kington wrote a regular column "Let's Parler Franglais" which was published in the British magazine "Punch" in the late 1970s. These columns were collected into a series of books: "Let's Parler Franglais", "Let's Parler Franglais Again!", "Parlez-vous Franglais?", "Let's Parler Franglais One More Temps", "The Franglais Lieutenant's Woman and Other Literary Masterpieces".

A somewhat different tack was taken in Luis van Rooten's "Mots d'Heures: Gousses, Rames: The D'Antin Manuscript". Here, English nursery rhymes are written with nonsensical French phrases meant to recall the sounds of the English words, and the resulting French texts are presented as a historical manuscript and given a pseudo-learned commentary.

Another classic is Jean Loup Chiflet's "Sky My Husband! Ciel Mon Mari!" which is a literal translation of French into English. However, in this context, the correct translation of is 'heavens...!'

In Monty Python's 1975 movie "Monty Python and the Holy Grail", the French castle guard (John Cleese) orders, when King Arthur (Graham Chapman) doesn't want to go away, his fellow guards to "Fetchez la vache.". The other French guards respond with " and he repeats "Fetchez la vache!"". The guards finally get it: fetch ('the cow'), which they then catapult at the Britons.

In French, refers to the use of English words sometimes deemed unwelcome borrowings or bad slang. An example would be (also ), which is used in many French dialects which have no synonym; however Canadians would use ' ('the end of the week') instead, although in France refers to the end of the work week, i.e. Thursday and Friday. also refers to nouns coined from Anglo-Saxon roots or from recent English loanwords (themselves not always Anglo-Saxon in origin), often by adding "-ing" at the end of a popular word—e.g., ('a car park or parking lot' is alternatively ' in Canadian French, although means 'the action of parking or the state of being parked' in European French); ('a campsite'); and ('shampoo', but pronounced , not ), which has been standardized and has appeared on many French hair-care product labels since at least the 1960s. A few words which have entered French are derived from English roots but are not found at all in English, such as ('a makeover'), and ('a rugby player'). Others are based on misunderstandings of English words, e.g.: "un " meaning 'a jog or a run' rather than 'a pediment'; meaning 'a tram', not 'a tram-track'. Still others are based on misapprehensions of English punctuation, e.g. (with the apostrophe in both singular and plural) meaning 'a lapel pin'; or word order, e.g. meaning 'a walkie-talkie' (hand-held, two-way radio). For those who do not speak English, such words may be believed to exist as such in English. However, in Canada, where both English and French are spoken, expressions such as and are not used.)

Some examples of Franglais are in fact imagined or examples of words being adopted from one language into another in the opposite direction of what many people believe. People who have no linguistic training or don't bother to consult dictionaries tend to create and perpetuate such urban legends about Franglais. For example, many numismatists think that the French spelling of the English term piedfort results from an imagined reintroduction of an English misspelling. In fact, the spelling "piéfort" is found in French dictionaries as an alternative of and even as the only spelling given in the 1932-1935 edition of the Dictionnaire de l'Académie française. and the etymology derived by professional linguists and shown in these dictionaries shows the change in spelling happened within French.

Owing to the worldwide popularity of the Internet, relatively new English words have been introduced into French (e.g. and , referring to either e-mail or an e-mail address). An equivalent for the English word "e-mail" derived from French roots was coined in Quebec French and promoted by Quebec government: "" (from ), and this term is now widely used there. The Académie française has also suggested the use of the abbreviation (from ) as an analogy with the abbreviation for 'telephone', to be used before an e-mail address; however the term, which roughly approximates the English pronunciation of "mail", is now used more broadly in France than that prescribed usage. Another example from French is the word . The equivalent of the English verb "to look at" in French is but the noun "a look" (i.e. the way that something looks or is styled) has become in French, such that the sentence "This Pepsi can has a new look" in French would be "".

After World War II, a backlash began in France over the growing use of English there. "Corruption of the national language" was perceived by some to be tantamount to an attack on the identity of the country itself. During this period, ever greater imports of American products led to the increasingly widespread use of some English phrases in French. Measures taken to slow this trend included government censorship of comic strips and financial support for the French film and French-language dubbing industries. Despite public policies against the spread of English, Franglais is gaining popularity in both writing and speaking.

In recent years, English expressions are increasingly present in French mass media:

Most telecommunication and Internet service providers use English and Franglais expressions in their product names and advertising campaigns. The leading operator, France Télécom, has dropped the accents in its corporate logo. In recent years, it has changed its product names with trendier expressions such as Business Talk, Live-Zoom, Family Talk. France Télécom's mobile telecommunications subsidiary Orange SA runs a franchise retail network called "mobistores". Its Internet subsidiary, formerly known as Wanadoo (inspired by the American slang expression "wanna do") provides a popular triple play service through its "Livebox" cable modem. The second-largest Internet service provider in France is Free, which offers its "freebox". Set-top boxes that are offered by many other providers are also following this trend (e.g. Neuf-box, Alice-box, etc.) and the word "box" by itself is gradually ending up referring to these set-top boxes.

SNCF, the state-owned railway company, has recently introduced a customer fidelity program called S'Miles. Meanwhile, Air France has renamed its Fréquence Plus frequent flyer program to Flying Blue. The Paris transportation authority RATP has also recently introduced a contactless smartcard ticketing system (like the Oyster card in London) called NaviGO.

Public authorities such as the Académie française and the Conseil supérieur de la langue française generally propose alternative words for anglicisms. The acceptance of such words varies considerably; for example, and existed before the English words "computer" and "software" reached France, so they are accepted (even outside France in the case of ). On the other hand, failed to replace "weekend" or "" (the latter being in current usage in Canada). The word "courriel", equivalent of "e-mail", coined and used in French-speaking Canada is gaining popularity in written European French. However, most French Internet users generally speak about "mail" without the prefix "e-". Note that English words are often shorter, and they are usually coined first (the French alternatives are generally thought of only after the original word has already been coined, and then they are debated at length before coming into use). This is partly why they tend to stay in use.

Alternative words proposed by the Académie française are sometimes poorly received by an aware (often technical) audience and unclear to a non-technical audience. The proposed terms may be ambiguous (often because they are coined based on phonetics, thus hiding their etymology) which results in nonsense (e.g. for CD-RW (literally 'rewritable CD-ROMs', despite "ROM" meaning 'read-only memory'). Some words are considered uncool (for example, adding the initial "t-" to "chat" to form (in accordance with French phonetics) or rendering "DVD" as (reproducing the French pronunciation of the letters in the initialism).

The use of English expressions is very common in the youth language, which combines them with wordplay. The letter "j" is thus sometimes humorously pronounced as in English in words such as ('youth'), rendered as /dʒœns/ and thus written , to refer to this trend.

Quebec is the only French majority province in Canada and the only "de jure" (but not "de facto") monolingual jurisdiction. New Brunswick is officially bilingual, and the other provinces, while mostly English-speaking, are not officially English-only.

When a speaker uses calques and loanwords in speech which includes English or French words and grammatical structures in a combination, it is sometimes referred to as Franglais, or a mixed language. The Montreal Gazette has examined this so-called "linguistic mosaic".

Quebec French has longstanding borrowings from English due to the historical coexistence of two speech communities within Quebec (and especially around Montreal). Likewise, Quebec English, the language of the English-speaking minority, has borrowed many French words such as "dépanneur" ('convenience store'), "autoroute" ('highway'), "stage" ('internship'), "circular" ('flyer', from the word , a circulated pamphlet), and many others . These are permanent and longstanding features of local usage, rather than the recent slangish improvisation by any speaker or affinity group with poor knowledge of the other language.
Some words are attributed to what is called Joual (French pronunciation: [ʒwal]): the name given by some to linguistic features of what is known as basilectal dialect of French when it is placed on Post-creole continuum.

These expressions have mainly become part of a common tongue/ born out of mutual concession to each other. In fact, the substantial bilingual community in and around Montreal will occasionally refer to Franglais, usually after it is pointed out by an observer that someone has used various French and English words, expressions or propositions in the same sentence, a surprisingly common occurrence in various spoken registers.

Canadian French is French as it is spoken in Canada. Scholars debate to what extent language mixture can be distinguished from other mechanisms, such as code-switching, substrata, or lexical borrowing. A mixed language arises in a population which is fluent in both languages.

The word "Franglais" refers to the long-standing and stable mixes of English and French spoken in some towns, cities, and rural areas of other Canadian provinces: New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Manitoba, and Newfoundland. Such mixing is used in the northern regions of Maine (U.S.) (see Chiac and Acadian French). It has been asserted that this mix uses approximately equal proportions of each language (except in Newfoundland), although it is more likely to be understood by a French-speaker, since it usually uses English words in French pronunciation and grammar.

Franglais is commonly spoken in French immersion schools in Ontario and Alberta, as well as in DSFM (Division scolaire Franco-Manitobaine) schools in Manitoba, where most students speak either French or English as their first or preferred language, yet they know school-related terms in French specifically (e.g. "Let's go to la bibliothèque", instead of "Let's go to the library"). As many French immersion classes and French schools have a strict "French-only" policy, such Franglais is used discreetly between students, or out of class.

Because of bilingual product packaging, speakers and readers may form new pronunciations that become terms. For example, someone may pronounce the words on a package of strong cheddar and call it "old fort".

Franglais, in the sense of mistaken usage by second-language speakers, occurs across Canada. An example of an anglicism turned Franglais is the mistranslation of English phrases into French by students unaware of the Canadian French term. For example, a hot dog is sometimes called "un chien chaud" when the French term is simply . (However, the Quebec government has itself promoted using expressions such as for 'hot dog', and for 'hamburger', neither of which has gained widespread acceptance.) In some ways, confusion over which expression is more correct, and the emphasis that many immersion schools place on eliminating anglicisms from students' vocabulary, has promoted the use of Franglais. Franglais can also slowly creep into use from mispronunciation and misspelling by many bilingual Canadians. Common mistakes that immersion or bilingual students propagate include incorrect inflection and stresses on syllables, incorrect doubling of consonants, strange vowel combinations in their spelling and using combinations of prefixes and suffixes from English.

Recently, Canadian youth culture (especially in British Columbia and southeastern Ontario) purposely uses Franglais for its comical or euphemistic characteristics, for example, in replacing English swear words with French ones. Some English-speaking Canadians euphemistically use the (i.e., religious words such as as expletives) rather than swearing in English.

There is a particular form of Franglish which consists in the adoption of English words with alternative meanings to their usage in actual English.

These are words like ('a scramble', 'a rush', 'a strong effort'), or ('a tan', 'the act of sunbathing'), made by adding the English ending "-ing" to a verb from French (e.g. 'to force' or 'to tan') to form a new noun. These are slang or informal at best, and not widely accepted.

Another type of false anglicism comes from the shortening of an English name, keeping only the first word (while the important word for English speakers is the last word, impossible to remove). For example, to designate a dress suit, the word is used by the French (and some other languages), borrowed ultimately English 'smoking jacket'. Yet the British use "dinner jacket" and Americans "tuxedo" (or "tux"); "smoking" does not exist in English other than as a form of the verb "to smoke", and as the gerund "smoking", referring to the act of smoking something or giving off smoke. Another example is the French term for 'clapperboard' as used in filmmaking.

They are either French constructions mimicking the English rules, or shifts of meaning which affect borrowings.

Cameroon has substantial English and French-speaking populations as a legacy of its colonial past as British Southern Cameroons and French Cameroun. Despite linguistically segregated education since independence, many younger Cameroonians in urban centres have formed a version of Franglais/Franglish from English, French and Cameroonian Pidgin English known as Camfranglais or Frananglais. Many educational authorities disapprove of Frananglais in Cameroon and have banned it in their schools. Nevertheless, the youth-culture argot has gained in popularity and has a growing music scene.

Franglais is spoken in London, due to its population of French speakers from France, Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Caribbean.

Franglais also thrives in communities where imperfect English–French bilingualism is common. The United Nations Office at Geneva is so named in an imitation of the French , rather than the expected ""in" Geneva".

Another example is provided by the civil servants in European Union institutions (European Parliament, European Commission, European Court of Justice), based in bilingual Brussels (French and Dutch) and Luxembourg City (Luxembourgish and German). They often work in English, but are surrounded by a French-speaking environment, which influences their English (e.g. "I'm a stagiaire at the Commission and I'm looking for another stage in a consultancy", referring to internships).





