Religion and business

Religion and business have throughout history interacted in ways that relate to and affected one another, as well as influenced sociocultural evolution, political geographies, and labour laws. As businesses expand globally they seek new markets which leads to expanding their corporation’s norms and rules to encompass the new locations norms which most often involve religious rules and terms.

Some areas, countries or cities have an economy based on religious tourism. Examples include Islamic Hajj tourism and Vatican tourism. The hotels and markets of important religious places are a source of income to the locals.

The boards or shines sometimes receive so much in donations that governments to take it under control for proper utilization of resources and management. The annual revenues of most of the religious places are not regulated.






Judaism outlines requirements of accurate weights and measurements in commerce, as well as prohibitions on monetary deception, verbal deception and misrepresentation. Jewish business ethics believe that god is the best source of value, believes in centrality of the community, and promise that men and women can transform themselves. The concept of business is perceived as legitimate by Judaism. There is a huge push for social responsibility in any business venture as well as a charity obligation of both public and private business organizations.

Globally, halal products comprise a US$2 trillion industry.

As of 2003, the kosher industry had certified more than 100,000 products, which total approximately US$165 billion in sales annually.

United Kingdom labour law prohibits employer discrimination based on religion, belief, or any lack thereof.

In the United States, labor laws including Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibit businesses from discriminating against employees based on the basis of religion. Business law is also at times applied to religious organizations, due to their status as incorporated entities.

Religious Freedoms Act of 1993:

Stops any agency, department, or official of the United States or any state from substantially burdening a person's exercise of religion even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability, except that the government may burden a person's exercise of religion only if it demonstrates that application of the burden to the person. 

Free Exercise Clause:

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise.

Equal Protection Clause:

Governmental body may not deny people equal protection of its governing clause.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC):

A Federal Agency that pushes equal opportunity in employment through administrative and judicial enforcement of the federal civil rights laws.

1961 Braunfeld v. Brown (4-5):

Abraham Braunfeld owned a retail and clothing furnishing store in Philadelphia. As an Orthodox Jew he observes Sabbath and is not allowed to work. The Pennsylvania Blue Law only allowed certain laws to remain open for business on Sunday. Because Braunfeld needs to be open six days a week for economic reasons but he couldn't be open on Saturday due to his observation of the Sabbath. The U.S Supreme court found that the Pennsylvania Blue Law wasn't unconstitutional and didn't violate the free exercise clause. The law didn't make any religious practices unlawful. It was just a way find a statewide day of rest and it was unfortunate that it fell on Sunday.

1963 Sherbert v. Verner (7-1):

Adeil Sherbert was fired because she refused to work on Saturday, which was the day of her worship as she is a member of the Seventh-day Adventist Church. The Employment Security Commission ruled that people Sherbert was ineligible for unemployment benefits because not working on Saturday was not a good enough reason. The U.S Supreme Court sided with Sherbert, citing the free exercise clause.

1972 Wisconsin v. Yoder (0-9):

Jonas Yoder and Warren Miller members of the old order Amish religion, and Adin Yutzy a member of conservative Amish Mennonite Church. These three parents were prosecuted under Wisconsin law, which states that all children must attend public school till 16. The parents refused to send their children after 8th grade citing religious concerns. The U.S Supreme Court sided with Yoder, Miller, and Yutzy under the free exercise clause.

1977 Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison (7-2):

Larry Hardison was an employee at Trans World Airline. Hardison was a member of the Worldwide Church of God and refused to work on Saturdays which was his sabbath. TWA transferred his shift from night to during the day on Saturday. But he didn't keep the same seniority once he switched shifts and therefore didn't have Saturdays off. The Supreme court sided with the Trans World Airlines because the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission states there needs to be “reasonable” accommodations for religious exercise.

1990 Employment Division Department of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith (6-3):

Two employees of a private drug rehabilitation organization ingested peyote as part of their religious ceremony at a Native American Church. The employees were fired and applied for unemployment benefit but had not granted them because they were fired from workplace misconduct. The U.S Supreme Court sided with the Employment Division of Oregon stating that even though the employees took peyote for religious reasons. Peyote is illegal in the United States.

2014 Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores (5-4):

Hobby Lobby owners have organized their stores around Christian faith. Under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) it talks about how for-profit businesses must provide contraceptives to all employees. The owners of Hobby Lobby sued the Department of Health and Human Services based on violation of the free exercise clause. The U.S Supreme Court sided with the Department of Health and Human Services citing there was no violation of the freedom of religion because religious beliefs must not infringe on third party people.

2018 Masterpiece Cakeshop Ltd v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission (7-2):

Masterpiece Cakeshop refused to make a cake for a wedding between two gay men, due to the businesses religious standing. The Colorado Civil rights Commission sided with the customers on the bases of discrimination on sexual orientation. The U.S Supreme Court reversed the Colorado Civil rights Commission's decision stating that they violated the business owner of Masterpiece Cakeshops right to their free exercise of religion.





