Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga

, commonly shortened to , is a famous set of four picture scrolls, or "emakimono", belonging to Kōzan-ji temple in Kyoto, Japan. The "Chōjū-giga" scrolls are also referred to as Scrolls of Frolicking Animals and Scrolls of Frolicking Animals and Humans in English. Some think that Toba Sōjō created the scrolls; however, it seems clear from the style that more than one artist is involved. The right-to-left reading direction of "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga " is traditional in East Asia, and is still common in Japan. "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga " is also credited as the oldest work of manga. The scrolls are now entrusted to the Kyoto National Museum and Tokyo National Museum.

The scrolls are the earliest in a linear monochrome drawing style that was to continue in use in Japanese painting (as they are all done with the usual writing and painting brush, they count as painting). 

As opened, the first scroll illustrates anthropomorphic rabbits and monkeys bathing and getting ready for a ceremony, a monkey thief runs from animals with sticks and knocks over a frog from the lively ceremony. Further on, the rabbits and monkeys are playing and wrestling while another group of animals participate in a funeral and frog prays to Buddha as the scroll closes.

The scrolls were also adapted into several novels published by Geijutsuhiroba, the first book simply compiled the scrolls into one publication, now out of print. One of the books participated as part of the company's "Fine Arts Log" series as well as some were exclusive to certain exhibitions. Other companies like Misuzu Shobo and Shibundō also published books based on the "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" emakimono.

Although "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" is sometimes credited as the first manga, there have been some disputes with the "Yomiuri Shimbun" newspaper. Seiki Hosokibara pointed to the "Shigisan-engi" scrolls as the first manga, and Kanta Ishida explained that the scrolls should be treated as masterpieces in their own right.

The "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" emakimono, belonging to the Kōzan-ji temple in Kyoto, Japan as an ancient cultural property, are usually thought to have been painted in the mid-12th century, whereas the third and fourth scrolls may well date from the 13th century.

Most think Toba Sōjō created "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga", who created a painting a lot like "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga"; however, it is hard to verify this claim. The drawings of "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" are making fun of Japanese priests in the creator's time period, characterising them as toads, rabbits and monkeys. "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" is read and rolled out from which can still be seen in manga and Japanese books. "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" is credited as being the oldest work of manga in Japan, and is a national treasure as well as many Japanese animators believe it is also the origin of Japanese animated movies. In "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" the animals were drawn with very expressive faces and also sometimes used "speed lines", a technique used in manga til this day. Emakimono like "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" and many others barely were seen in the public until they made their way into popular culture, with many common people imitating the style. Emakimono emerged very popular in the city of Ōtsu, Shiga, and being dubbed "Ōtsu-e" after its popularity in the city around the 17th century. The first two scrolls are entrusted to the Tokyo National Museum, and the second two are entrusted to the Kyoto National Museum. The scrolls currently on display at Kōzan-ji are reproductions.

The first scroll, which is considered the most famous, depicts various animals (frogs, rabbits and monkeys) frolicking as if they were human. There is no writing on any of the scrolls; they consist of pictures only. The first scroll is also the largest, with a length of 11 meters (36 ft) and 30 cm (1 ft) wide. As the first scroll is opened, rabbits and monkeys are bathing and swimming in a lake, moving on past the mountains, cliffs and trees are rabbits and frogs making bow and arrows. Further more, more rabbits and frogs are bringing pots and boxes to a (currently) unknown event. Frogs and rabbits pass by monks with their cattle (wild boar, sika deer) and a monkey runs away, supposedly stealing, and being chased by a rabbit with a long stick, further more a frog is lying on the floor who could have possibly been knocked over by the thief. Nearby, a celebration has started with two frogs dancing, and a group of animals having a conversation. Not too far from the celebration are animals wrestling and fighting and two monkeys holding a box. Far from the celebration are a group of animals at a funeral and a frog praying in front of a frog shaped Budai as the scroll closes.

Four publications based on "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" have been released by the publisher Geijutsuhiroba. The first "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" book published by the company was which simply compiled the "Chōjū-giga" emakimono into one publication, released on February 2003, now out of print. A publication made for the anniversary of "Chōjū-giga" entitled was released on October 11, 2007 as a part of the series. All four scrolls were published in actual size in their boxset publication entitled "Chōjū Jinbutsu Giga" released June 10, 2008. Exclusive to the Suntory Museum of Art exhibition of "Chōjū-giga", the same company released a book entitled . "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" was also released in a "shinsōbon" (deluxe edition) by Misuzu Shobo. In 1991 a book by Shibundō entitled "Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga to Okoe: Emaki" was published and written by Nobuo Tsuji.

The "Yomiuri Shimbun" newspaper with Kanta Ishida discussed different theories of what really is the "first manga". Manga artist, Seiki Hosokibara pointed to "Shigisan-engi" as the first manga in history. Ishida said that the scrolls be treated as masterpieces in their own right, and not be cubby-holed as just the origin of manga and they have no connection with contemporary manga and the domestic works people are familiar with today.







