World Day for the End of Fishing

The World Day for The End of Fishing (WoDEF) is an international campaign launched by animal rights activists demanding the end of fishing practices. It takes place the fourth Saturday of March every year.

The campaign was born in Switzerland and France in 2016 and took an international turn in 2017. It was first launched by the association "Pour L'Égalité Animale" (PEA).
Over the years and around the world lots of actions were organized for the WoDEF : street protests, sit-ins, screenings, conferences, fish counts, workshops, exhibitions, etc. in order to bring awareness to fish pain, sentience and fish intelligence.

In 2017, for its first edition, the event occurred in many cities around the world : in Lorient, Paris, Valence, Lyon, Lille, Montpellier, Saint Malo, Rennes (France), Geneva, Lausanne (Swiss), Brussells, Namur, Charleroi (Belgium), Montreal, Toronto (Canada), Stuttgart, Vogelsberg, Siegen, Hannover, Göttingen, Hamburg, Berlin (Germany), Lisbon (Portugal), Tel Aviv, Haifa (Israel), Melbourne (Australia), San Diego and Monterey Bay (United States).

In 2018, for its second edition, the event occurend once again internationally : in Canada, Australia, Belgium, Swiss, Peru, Sweden, United States, Germany, Japan, Brazil, France, Denmark, Mexico, United Kingdom and Panama.

Also, in 2018, an open letter signed by dozens of philosophers and scientists, including , Peter Singer, , Sue Donaldson, Will Kymlicka and Élise Desaulniers, was published in "Le Nouveau Magazine Littéraire" in order to highlight the WoDEF.

In 2019, for its third edition, activists from pierced their cheeks with fish hooks in a street protest for the WoDEF.

The organizers of the Word Day for the End of Fishing demand the abolition of all kinds of fishing practices for fish, crustaceans and cephalopods : the end of aquaculture, industrial or wild fishing, the use of marine animals as domestic pets, in scientific experiments and for entertainment, in antispeciesist perspective.

Protesters affirm that fish can feel pain and that it is unecessary to consume them. 



