Property technology

Property technology (or proptech, also called real estate technology) is the application of information technology and platform economics to real estate markets.

Some goals of real estate technology include reducing paperwork or making transactions quicker and more efficient, it is often thought of as overlapping with financial technology. Contemporary digital real estate technologies could therefore include property management using digital dashboards, smart home technology, research and analytics, listing services/tech-enabled brokerages, mobile applications, residential and commercial lending, 3D-modeling for online portals, automation, crowdfunding real estate projects, shared spaces management, as well as organizing, analyzing, and extracting key data from lengthy rental documents.

There are currently many startups trying to target every segment of the property market chain, attempting to disrupt and improve how the current market players (developers, buyers, sellers, renters, investors, and real estate professionals) design, construct, market, discover, transact and operate real estate. These startups have been supported by seed funding and investment from a range of sources, including some specialist real estate technology venture capital funds.

In the first six months of 2019, $12.9 billion was poured into real-estate tech startups by venture investors, which surpassed the $12.7 billion record for all of 2017. In 2015, real estate tech reached record funding and deals levels, with more than $1.7bn deployed globally across more than 190 deals. This represents a 50% increase year-over-year and a whopping 821% increase in funding compared to 2011′s total. Deal activity also soared, growing 378% with respect to 2011′s total, and 12% year-over-year. This investment appeared to increase further in 2017 to £8.5bn.

Advances in the residential side of real estate technology encompass a number of target areas, but generally aim to reduce friction in the purchase, sale, or rental of a property. Areas of focus include finding a home, selling a home, financing a purchase, closing on a property (including valuation, title & escrow, and insurance), managing a property, managing loans, and mortgage lending software.


